[TOPIC: Billiards Glossary]
1 ball: Alsothe 1.Theobject ballnumbered1; in American-style pool ball sets, it issolidyellow.
1-cushion: See theOne-cushion billiardsmain article.
1-pocket: See theOne-pocketmain article for the game.
2 ball: Alsothe 2.Theobject ballnumbered2; in American-style pool ball sets, it issolidblue. In someAmerican snookerball sets, theyellow ballis numbered 2, its point value.
3 ball: See theThree-ballmain article for the game.Alsothe 3.Theobject ballnumbered3; in American-style pool ball sets, it issolidred. In someAmerican snookerball sets, thegreen ballis numbered 3, its point value.
3-cushion: See theThree-cushion billiardsmain article for the game.
4 ball: See theFour-ball billiardsmain article for the game.Alsothe 4.Theobject ballnumbered4; in American-style pool ball sets, it issolidpurple or rarely pink. In someAmerican snookerball sets, thebrown ballis numbered 4, its point value.
5 ball: Alsothe 5.Theobject ballnumbered5; in American-style pool ball sets, it issolidorange. In someAmerican snookerball sets, theblue ballis numbered 5, its point value.
5-pins: See theFive-pin billiardsmain article for the formerly Italian, now internationally standardized game; orDanish pin billiardsfor the five-pin traditional game of Denmark.
6 ball: See theNine-ball § Derived gamessection for the game.Alsothe 6.Theobject ballnumbered6; in American-style pool ball sets, it issolidgreen. The 6 is themoney ball(orgame ball) in a game ofsix-ball. It is the last ball that must be pocketed, after the remaining five object balls have been pocketed, or may be pocketed early to win the game so long as the lowest-numbered ball on the table is struck before the 6. In other games, such aseight-ball, the 6 is simply one of the regular object balls. In someAmerican snookerball sets, thepink ballis numbered 6, its point value.
7 ball: See theSeven-ballmain article for the game.Alsothe 7.Theobject ballnumbered7; in American-style pool ball sets, it issolidmaroon, brown, or rarely tan. Some variants, for theseven-ballgame, are brown with a black or white stripe. The 7 is themoney ball(orgame ball) in a game of seven-ball. It is the last ball that must be pocketed, after the remaining six object balls have been pocketed, or may be pocketed early to win the game so long as the lowest-numbered ball on the table is struck before the 7. In other games, such aseight-ball, the 7 is simply one of the regular object balls. In someAmerican snookerball sets, theblack ballis numbered 7, its point value.
8 ball: An 8 ball (with the cue ball behind it)See theEight-ballandEight-ball pool (British variation)main articles for the games.Alsothe 8.Theobject ballnumbered8; in both American- and British-style pool ball sets, it issolidblack, though some of the latter use an unnumberedblack ball. The 8 is themoney ball(orgame ball) in a game ofeight-balland related games. It is the last ball that must bepocketed, after thesuitof sevenobject ballsbelonging to the player who is shooting for the 8. (Pocketing the 8 early is a loss of game—unless done on thebreak shot, in most rules variants.) In other games, such asnine-ballandstraight pool, the 8 is simply another object ball. Due to its striking colouration and regular use as a money ball, it iscommonly used as a symbol in popular culture.
9 ball: See theNine-ballmain article for the gameAlsothe 9.Theobject ballnumbered9; in American-style pool ball sets, it isstripedyellow. The 9 is themoney ball(orgame ball) in a game ofnine-ball. It is the last ball that must be pocketed, after the remaining eight object balls have been pocketed, or may be pocketed early to win the game so long as the lowest-numbered ball on the table is struck before the 9. In other games, such aseight-ball, the 9 is simply one of the regular object balls.
9-pins: See theGorizianamain article for the game sometimes callednine-pins.
10 ball: See theTen-ballmain article for the gameAlsothe 10.Theobject ballnumbered10; in American-style pool ball sets, it isstripedblue. The 10 is themoney ball(orgame ball) in a game often-ball. It is the last ball that must be pocketed, after the remaining nine object balls have been pocketed, or may be pocketed early to win the game so long as the lowest-numbered ball on the table is struck before the 10, and the 10 ball and pocket arecalled. In other games, such aseight-ball, the 10 is simply one of the regular object balls.
11 ball: Alsothe 11.Theobject ballnumbered11; in American-style pool ball sets, it isstripedred.
12 ball: Alsothe 12.Theobject ballnumbered12; in American-style pool ball sets, it isstripedpurple or rarely pink
13 ball: Alsothe 13.Theobject ballnumbered13; in American-style pool ball sets, it isstripedorange.
14 ball: Alsothe 14.Theobject ballnumbered14; in American-style pool ball sets, it isstripedgreen.
15 ball: Alsothe 15.Theobject ballnumbered15; in American-style pool ball sets, it isstripedmaroon, brown, or rarely tan.
16-red clearance: Insnooker, a totalclearancein which thebreakstarts with afree ball. The break includespottingacolour ballcounting as aredand all 15 reds.
above: Used insnookerin reference to the position of thecue ball. It is above theobject ballif it is off-straight on thebaulk cushionside of the imaginary line for a straightpot(e.g. "he'll want to finish above thebluein order to go into thepinkandreds"). It is also common to use the termhighinstead.[1]
action: 1.Gamblingor the potential for gambling (US).
added: Used with an amount to signifymoney addedto a tournament prize fund in addition to the amount accumulated from entry fees (e.g. "$500 added").[2]
ahead race: Alsoahead session.Amatchformat in which a player has to establish a lead of an agreed number offrames(games) in order to win (e.g. in a ten-ahead race, a player wins when she/he has won ten moreracksthan the opponent).[1]Contrastrace [to].
aiming line: An imaginary line drawn from the desired path anobject ballis to be sent (usually the center of apocket) and the center of the object ball.[3]
anchor: Tofreezea ball to acushion; such a ball may be said to beanchored(British:tight). This term is largely obsoletebalkline billiardsjargon.[4]
anchor nurse: A type ofnurse shotused incarom billiardsgames. With oneobject ballbeinganchored(frozen, British:tight) to acushionand the second object ball just slightly away from the cushion, thecue ballis gently grazed across the face of both balls, freezing the away ball to the rail and moving the frozen ball away the same distance its partner was previously, in an identical but reversed configuration, in position to be struck again by the cue ball from the opposite side to repeat this pattern, back and forth.[4]Comparecradle cannon.
anchor space: A 7-by-14-inch (180 mm × 360 mm) box drawn onthe tableinbalkline billiardswhere abalklinemeets with thecushionthat sets the area of the enclosed as part of both adjoiningbalkspaces. Originally 3.5 by 7 inches (8.9 cm × 17.8 cm) (and called Parker's box), it was introduced to combat theanchor nurse, and was increased to its current size to curtail the effectiveness of thechuck nurse, which was developed as a response to the original box.[1]
angle of incidence: The angle at which a ball approaches acushion, as measured from theperpendicularto the cushion.[5]The phrase has been in use since as early as 1653.[1]
angle of reflection: The angle from which a ball rebounds off acushion, as measured from theperpendicularto the cushion.[1][5]
angled ball: Insnookerandpool, acue ballsituated in thejawsof a pocket such that a/theball-oncannot be struck directly.[1][6]Comparecorner-hooked.
arc: The extent to which thecue ballcurves as a result of asemi-masséormasséshot.
apex: Alsoapex ball,apex of the triangle,apex of the diamondorapex of the rack.The ball placed at the front of a group ofrackedobject balls(i.e., toward thebreakerand furthest from the racker), and in most games situated over the table'sfoot spot.[6]
around the table: In carom games, a shot in which in attempting to score, the cue ball contacts three or morecushions, usually including bothshort rails.[7]
around the houses: Used in snooker to describe the path that thecue ballmust take into and out ofbaulkas a result of poorposition play, specifically coming around thebaulk coloursoff three or morecushions, normally on a shot on theblueto finish on aredas a result of finishinglowon the blue.
back: Same asstake(verb).[1]
back cut: Acut shotin which if a line were drawn from thecue ballto therailbehind the targetedobject ball, perpendicular to that rail, the object ball would lie beyond the line with respect to thepocketbeing targeted.[8]
back spin: Steve Davisplays a back-spin ball to prevent the cue ball from falling into the side pocket.Alsobackspin,back-spin,backward spin.[1]Same asdraw.See illustration atspin.Contrasttop spin.
backswing: The part of thestrokewhere a player'scue stickis moved away from thecue ballbefore striking it.[9]
bag: Chiefly British. Same aspocket.
baize: Main article:BaizeA coarsewoolencloth used to cover billiard tables, usually green in colour. Sometimes calledfelt, based on a similarity in appearance, though very different in makeup.[1]
balance point: The point, usually around 18 inches from the bottom of acue, at which the cue will balance when resting on one hand.[1][6]
balk: Alsobalk space.1.  An area defined on abilliard tableby one or morebalklines. In the eponymous game ofbalkline billiards, there are eight balks defined by perpendicular balklines, in which only a set number ofcaromsmay be scored before at least one ball must leave the area.[10]In the earlier (and short-lived) "champions' game", there were four triangular balks, one at each corner, defined by single diagonal balklines. Not to be confused withbaulk(second definition).
balkline: Alsobalk line.1.  A line drawn horizontally from a point on abilliard table'srailto the corresponding point on the opposite rail, thus defining a region (abalk). In the eponymousbalkline billiardsthere are four balklines, drawn parallel to and typically 14 or 18 inches from the cushions of the table, dividing it into nine compartments or divisions, of which the outside eight are the balks, in which only a set number of caroms may be scored before at least one ball must leave the area.[10]Not to be confused withbaulk line, though the concepts and etymologies are related. Seebalk(second definition).
ball-in-hand: Alsocue ball in-hand.The option of placing thecue ballanywhere on the table prior to shooting, in a game ofpool. Usually only available to a player when the opposing player has committed some type offoulunder a particular game's rules[1][11](cf. thefree throwinbasketballby way of comparison).See alsoin-handfor thesnookerdefinition.A common variation, used in games such asstraight pooland often inbar pool, is ball-in-hand "behind the head string", also "behind the line" or "from the kitchen", meaning the ball-in-hand option is restricted to placement anywhere behind thehead string, i.e., in the area ofthe tableknown as thekitchen.
ball-on: Not always hyphenated. Plural:balls-on.[12]Alsoon[-]ball.Any legally strikeable ball on the table in snooker and generally British terminology.[7]For example, inblackball,[12]if a player is playingyellows, any yellow ball (or any solid, from 1 to 7, if using a solids-and-stripes ball set) can be the ball-on until they are allpotted, in which case the 8 ball is the ball-on. Insnooker, at the beginning of a player's turn, unless all are already potted, anyred ballcan be the ball-on.[1]Compareobject ball.
ball rack: 1.Same asrack (noun), sense 1
ball return: A collection bin mounted below the foot end of a table, to which balls potted in any pocket will return by means of gravity-assisted gutters or troughs running from each pocket opening to the bin; these are theball-return mechanism, which may be internal to the table or an external gutter system. Ball returns have been in use since at least the 1700s. Pockets that simply collect balls are known asdrop pockets.[1]A table without a ball return may be called a "drop pocket table", while a table featuring a ball return may be called a "gully table".[13]Coin-operatedbar tableshave ball-return mechanisms that separate thecue ballfrom theobject ballsso that the object balls are captured when pocketed until the game ends, then released when paid for again, while the cue ball is continually returned for continued play afterscratches. This type of table can use a variety of methods to distinguish the cue ball from object balls including theMagnetic cue ball, the dense ceramic "rock" and the oversized "grapefruit" ball. Ball return mechanisms have also been devised that use a smaller, lighter cue ball, instead of a magnetic or heavier one. There are tables that use optical sensors to distinguish a standard cue ball from object balls.[14]Some of them are also setup to return the 8 ball as well, so that pocketing it on the break does not end the game.
banger: A derogatory term for a recreational or beginning player who "bangs" the balls without any thought forpositionnor attempt to control thecue ball; also a reference to the predilection of beginners to often hit the cue ball far harder than necessary.[15]Compare Britishpotter.
bank shot: Alsobank.Shot in which anobject ballis driven to one or more rails prior to beingpocketed(or in some contexts, prior to reaching its intended target; not necessarily a pocket). Sometimes "bank" is conflated to refer tokick shotsas well, and in the UK it is often called adouble.[1][6]
bank-the-8: A rule variant common inbar poolversions ofeight-ball, in which the 8-ball must be pocketed on abank shot(generally this would either be accomplished via a bank shot proper or akick shot); shooting the 8 straight in is a loss of game. Players may agree before the game begins to invoke this rule, or one player may challenge another player (who might accept or refuse) to conclude the game in this manner after it is already under way. Playing bank-the-8 can be considered rude if many other players are waiting to use the table, since it often makes the game last considerably longer. Often on bar tables threescratches while shooting for the 8 determines a loss. The same with last-pocket.
bar player: Alsobar league player.A player that predominantly plays inbars/pubs, or is in a bar-based pool league. Often used pejoratively bypool hallplayers to refer to a perceived lesser skill level of such players.See alsobar pool,bar table.
bar pool: Alsobar rules,pub pool,tavern pool.Pool, almost always a variant ofeight-ball, that is played bybar playerson abar table. Bar pool has rules that vary from region to region, sometimes even from venue to venue in the same city, especially in the U.S. Wise players thus ensure understanding of and agreement to the rules before engaging in amoney gameunder bar rules. Typical differences between bar pool and tournament eight-ball are the lack ofball-in-handafter afoul, the elimination of a number of fouls, and (with numbered ball sets) the requirement that most aspects of a shot becalled(includingcushionsand otherobject ballsto be contacted) not just thetarget ballandpocket. Bar pool has evolved into this "nitpicky" version principally to make the games last longer, since bar pool is typically played on coin-operated tables that cost money per-game rather than per-hour. Competitive league pool played on bar tables, however, usually uses international, national or local/regional league rules, and is not what is usually meant by "bar pool". Not to be confused with the game ofbar billiards.
bar table: Alsobar box,pub table,tavern table,coin-operated table,coin-op table.A distinctive size of pool table found inbars,pubs, ortavernsas well as venues such asfamily entertainment centers,arcadesandbowling alleys. These are smaller than the full-size tables found inpool halls. While typical professional and competition tables are9 ft ×4+1⁄2ft (2.7 m × 1.4 m), bar tables are typically7 ft ×3+1⁄2ft (2.1 m × 1.1 m). In bars they are almost always coin-operated. Another distinguishing factor is the cue ball; these tables capture pocketedobject ballsto remove them from play, but selectively return ascratchedcue ball. The cue balls historically were differently sized or of different density so they could be mechanically separated. Because this changes themechanicsof the cue ball, these cue balls do not play as competition cue balls, and they are therefore deprecated by aficionados. However, modern bar tables typically make use of a magnetic layer inside a regulation size and weight cue ball paired with a magnet mechanism within the table'sball returnsystem that separates out the cue ball without requiring cue ball characteristics that affect play.[16]Systems that use optical sensors to distinguish the cue ball have also been introduced.[14]Pool hall players complain also that theclothused on bar tables is often greatly inferior (in particular that it is "slow" and thatenglishdoes not "take" enough), and often find that thecushionsare not as responsive as they are used to.[1]
baulk: Alsobaulk area,baulk end.Insnooker,English billiards, andblackball,[12]the area of thebottomof thetablethat is between thebaulk lineand thebaulk cushion, which housesthe "D"and is somewhat analogous to thekitchenin American-stylepool.[1][17]
baulk colour: Insnooker, any of the threecolour ballsthat getspottedon thebaulk line.[1]The left-to-rightgreen,brownandyellow ballorder is the subject of themnemonicphrase "Godblessyou".[18]
baulk cushion: Insnooker, thecushionopposite thetop cushionand bounded by theyellowandgreen pockets. Also known as thebottom cushion.[1]
baulk line: Alsobaulk-line.[19]A straight line drawn 29 inches (73.66 cm) from the face of thebaulk cushionon a standard 6 × 12 footsnookertable.[1]Its positioning varies on other sizes of tables. Baulk lines may also be drawn onEnglish billiardstables, and even British-stylepooltables. The baulk line is an integral part ofthe "D".[20]The baulk line's position is always determined by measurement from the baulk cushion, in contrast to the similar but differenthead string, the position of which is determined by thediamonds. Not to be confused withbalkline.
baulk pocket: Insnooker, acorner pocketlocated at either end of thebaulk cushion. Theyellow pocketandgreen pocketare both baulk pockets.
baulk rail: Same asbottom rail(UK),head rail(US).
baulk spot: Alsomiddle spot in baulk,baulk line spot,middle of the baulk-line spot, etc.[21][19]Thespot, usually unmarked because of its obviousness at the intersection of thebaulk lineandlong string. As such, it is also the middle of the flat side ofthe "D". In snooker,same asbrown spot.[22][19]Comparehead spot.
bed: The flat surface of a table, exclusive of thecushions.[1][17]The bed is covered withbilliard clothlike the cushions. Theplaying areaof the table consists of the bed except where the cushion overhangs the bed, i.e. it is all of the bed between the cushionnoses. Quality beds are made of smooth-groundslate, though very cheap tables may useparticle boardorplywood. The earliest beds were simply the surfaces of the wooden tables on which the game was played.
below: Used in snooker in reference to the position of thecue ball. It is "below" the object ball if it is off-straight on thetop cushionside of the imaginary line for a straight pot (e.g. she will want to finish below theblackin order to go into thereds). This may seem counterintuitive; seeabovefor an explanation.
big: Alsobigs,big balls,big ones.Ineight-ball, to be shooting the stripedsuit(group) of balls (9 through 15); "you're big, remember", "you're big balls" or "I've got the big ones".[1]Comparestripes,yellows,high,overs; contrastlittle.Not to be confused with the carom billiards concept of abig ball.
big ball: Acarom billiardsmetaphor, it refers to an object ball positioned and being approached in such a manner that a near miss will rebound off a cushion and still score. It isas ifthe ball were larger than normal, making it easier to contact. Normally a ball near a rail is a big ball, but only if being approached from an angle and if all the prerequisite rails have already been contacted. 
Not to be confused with the eight-ball term "the big balls", referring to the higher-numbered striped balls. In older British usage the concept was referred to as "large ball".[1]See alsobig pocket.
big pocket: Apooland occasionallysnookerterm (inherited from carom billiards by way of "big ball", above), it is a metaphor for a shot that is very difficult to miss pocketing for any of a number of reasons, most commonly: either the object ball is positioned such that a near miss on one side of it will likely cause the cue ball to rebound off the rail into the object ball and pocket it anyway; or another ball is positioned such that if the target ball does not go straight in, it is still likely to go in off the other ball in akiss. It isas ifthe pocket, for this one shot, had become larger. The term can also refer to the angle of shot toward a pocket, especially a side pocket; the pocket is said to be "bigger", for example, on a shot that is only a 5-degree angle away from straight on, than on a 45-degree angle shot which is much more likely to hit one of the cushion points and bounce away.
billiard: Alsobilliard shot.1.  Any shot in which thecue balliscaromedoff anobject ballto strike another object ball (with or without contacting cushions in the interim).[1]
billiard marker: 1.  A person who records thepointsfor each player during a game;[24]
billiards: 1.  In the US, Canada and in many different countries and languages (under various spellings) as well as historically, generally refers to allcue sports;
billiards glasses: Billiards glassesAlsopool spectacles,snooker specs, etc.Eyeglassesspecially made forcue sports, with tall lenses, set unusually high, so that when the head is lowered over thecue stickfor aiming, with the nose pointing downward, the eyes can still look through the lenses instead of over them. They are especially popular amongsnookerplayers (notably, 1985 World ChampionDennis Taylor).
black ball: Alsothe black.1.  Insnooker, the highest-valuecolour ballon the table, being worth seven points.[1]It is placed on theblack spot.[25]In some snooker ball sets, it is numbered "7" on its surface.
black spot: The markedspoton asnooker tableat which theblack ballis placed. On tournament-size tables, it is12+3⁄4inches (324 mm) from thetop cushion, on thelong string.[25]That is, it is between the top cushion and thepyramid.
blank: 1.  An unfinished bottom half of a two-piece cue (thebuttsection) with the splice completed, but the cue not yetturnedon a lathe to produce the final shape, and certain features having not yet been added such as awrap,joint mechanism,butt cap,bumperandinlays.[26]
blue ball: Alsothe blue(s).1.  Insnooker, thecolour ballworth five points,[1]placed on theblue spotin the centre of the table.[25]In some ball sets, it is numbered "5" on its surface.
blue spot: The markedspoton asnooker tableat which theblue ballis placed. Regardless of table size, it is at the lengthwise and widthwise centre of the table (i.e. it is the same as thecentre spot.[25]
body english: The useless but common practice of contorting one's body while a shot is in play, usually in the direction one wishes a ball or balls to travel, as if in the vain hope that this will influence the balls' trajectories; the term is considered humorous.[1]See alsoenglish.
bottle: Alsoshake bottle,pea bottle,pill bottle,tally bottle,kelly bottle.The bottle used in various games to hold numberedpeas, it is employed to assign random spots to players in a roster (such as in a tournament), or to assign random balls to players of a game (such as inkelly poolandbottle pool).[1][28][23]
bottom: 1.Chiefly British:The half of thetablefrom which thebreak shotis taken. This usage is conceptually opposite that in North America, where this end of the table is called thehead.Contrasttop.See alsobaulk.
bottom cushion: Chiefly British:Thecushionon thebottom rail. Also known as thebaulk cushion, especially insnooker.Comparehead cushion(U.S.); contrasttop cushion.
bottom rail: Chiefly British:Theshort railat thebottomof thetable. Traditionally this is the rail on which the table manufacturer's logo appears. Also known as thebaulk rail, especially insnooker.Comparehead rail(U.S.); contrasttop rail.
bottom spin: Alsobottomspin,bottom-spin,bottom.Same asback spin, i.e.screw(UK),draw(US).Contrasttop spin.See illustration atspin.
bouclée: A type ofbridgeformed between the thumb and forefinger, creating a loop for thecueto pass through. Principally used incarom billiards, the term isFrenchfor 'curled'.[29]
break: 1.Alsobreak shotorbreak off, as a noun.Typically describes the first shot in most types of billiards games. Incarom gamesit describes the first point attempt, as shot from an unvaryingcue ballandobject ballsplacement; in manypoolgames it describes the first shot, which is used to separate the object balls that have beenrackedtogether;[1]
break and dish: Same asbreak and run(chiefly British).
break and run: Alsobreak and run out.Chiefly American:Inpool games, when a playerbreakstherackedobject balls,pocketsat least one ball on the break, and commences torun outthe remaining object balls without the opponent getting avisitat the table. Hyphenated when used as an adjective or compound noun instead of a verbal phrase.See alsorun the table,rack and run.
break ball: In straight pool, the last object ball left on a table before the remaining fourteen balls must be racked so the player at the table may continue their run. It is called the "break ball" because it is common for players to try to leave this ball in such a position that they may easily pot it and billiard off of it to break open the rack of fourteen balls and continue their run.
break box: Diagram showing thebreak boxand its relation to thekitchenarea andhead stringInEuropean Pocket Billiard Federation(EPBF)nine-ball, the break box is a zone in the "kitchen" of thehead(British:bottom) of thetable, from which thebreak shotmust be taken with thecue ball.[30][31]The break box consists of the middle 50% of the kitchen area, delimited latitudinally by thehead rail(British:bottom rail) andhead string(not thebaulk line), and longitudinally by two parallel lines drawn (on the cloth, or more often imaginarily) from the head raildiamondsthat are closest to theheadcorner pockets, out to the head string(see illustration to the right)on either side. This departure fromWPAWorld Standardised Rules defeats the common break-from-the-side-rail technique for pocketing the 9 ball to win the game on the break; while 9 ball breaks are still possible, they are much more difficult under this rule.[30]This EPBF Euro-Tour requirement was added in 2008 to the Europe vs. USall-starteam event, theMosconi Cup, but has not otherwise been seen much by non-Europeans as of 2011.[update]
break down one's cue: To take one's two-piececue stickapart. When done before a game's conclusion, it may indicate that the game is conceded.[1]Different leagues have different rules on this matter.
bridge: Either the player's hand or amechanical bridgeused to support the shaft end of the cue stick during a shot. Also the particular hand formation used for this purpose (there are many).[1][23]
bridge hand: The hand used by a player as abridgeduring a normal shot that does not involve amechanical bridge. The bridge hand is usually a player's non-dominant hand.[1]
brown ball: Alsothe brown.Insnooker, the highest-valuebaulk colour, worth four points.[32]It is placed on thebrown spot.[32][25]In some (especially American) snooker ball sets, it is numbered "4" on its surface.
brown spot: Thespot(often not marked) on asnooker tableat which thebrown ballis placed. Regardless of table size, it is the middle point of thebaulk line.[32][19]I.e., it is thesame as thebaulk spot.[19]The left-to-right order of thegreen, brown andyellowballs is the subject of themnemonicphrase "Godblessyou".[18]
bumper: The bumper on the bottom of a cue, usually made from rubber, which insulates thebutt capfrom contact with the floor and greatly reduces noise. The bumper was first patented in 1880.[1]
burnish: 1.  To seal the pores of a woodencue'sshaftby rubbing vigorously with some material. Leather is commonly employed for the task, as ispaper money.
burnisher: 1.  A pad, usually of leather, used toburnish(seal the wood pores of) acue shaft.
bushka rings: Named after their innovator, legendary cuemakerGeorge Balabushka, bushka rings are decorative bands of material incorporated into pool cues, commonly just above thewraparea, in the form of ebony and ivory blocks, or sometimes other materials, alternating in a checked pattern.[33]
business, doing: Collusion between matchplay opponents who prearrange the winner of a match on which other people's money is wagered, in order to guarantee a payday.[1]
butt: The bottom portion of a pool cue which is gripped by a player's hand.[1][23]
butt cap: A protective cap mounted on the end of thebuttof a cue.

---

[TOPIC: Three-cushion billiards]
Three-cushion billiards, also calledthree-cushion carom, is a form ofcarom billiards. The object of the game is tocaromthecue balloff bothobject ballswhile contacting therailcushionsat least three times before contacting the second object ball. A point is scored for each successful carom. In most shots the cue ball hits the object balls one time each, although hitting them any number of times is allowed as long as both are hit. The cue ball may contact the cushions before or after hitting the first object ball. It does not have to contact three different cushions as long as it has been in contact with any cushion at least three times in total.

Three-cushion dates to the 1870s, and while the origin of the game is not entirely known, it evolved fromone-cushion billiards, which in turn developed fromstraight rail billiardsfor the same reason thatbalklinealso arose from straight rail. Such new developments made the game more challenging, less repetitive, and more interesting for spectators as well as players, by thwarting the ability of highly skilled players to rack up point after point at will by relying onnurse shots.

Wayman Crow McCreery, the Internal Revenue Collector of the Port ofSt. Louis, Missouri, born June 14, 1851, in St. Louis,[1]popularized the game.[2][3]At least one publication categorically states he invented the game as well.[4]

The first three-cushion billiards tournament took place January 14–31, 1878 in C. E. Mussey'sbilliard roomin St. Louis, with McCreery a participant. The tournament was won byNew YorkerLeon Magnus. The high run for the tournament was just 6 points, and the high average a .75.[5]The game was infrequently played prior to 1907, with top carom players of the era[who?]voicing their dislike of it. However, after the introduction of the Lambert Trophy in 1907, the game became increasingly popular both in the United States and internationally.[2]: 255[6]

By 1924, three-cushion had become so popular that two giants in other cue sport disciplines agreed to take up the game especially for a challenge match. On September 22, 1924Willie Hoppe, the world'sbalklinechampion (who later took up three-cushion with a passion), andRalph Greenleaf, the world'sstraight pooltitle holder, played a well advertised, multi-daymatchto 600points. Hoppe was the eventual winner with a final score of 600–527. The game's decline in the United States began in 1952 when Hoppe, then 51-time billiards champion, announced his retirement.[2]: 255[7][8][9]Over time, three-cushion completely supplanted balkline billiards, once the world championship carom game.

Three-cushion retains popularity in parts of Europe, Asia, and Latin America.[2]: 255The game's slow resurgence in United States popularity is due in part to the introduction of theSang Lee International Opentournament inFlushing, New York, in 2005, with first-place prize money up to US$25,000. The game has also seen increased coverage in cue sports publications based in the United States, such asBilliards DigestandPool & Billiard Magazine.

Three-cushion billiards is a difficult game. Averaging one point perinningis usually national-level play, and averaging 1.5 or more is world-class play. An average of 1 means that for every turn at the table, a player point success rate is 50%. An average of 2 means a success rate of roughly 67%.

The high run at three-cushion billiards for many years was 25, set over two games (fourteen and out and starting with eleven in the next game) by the AmericanWillie Hoppein 1918 during an exhibition in San Francisco.[citation needed]In 1968Raymond Ceulemansimproved the record to 26 in a match in the Simonis Cup tournament. In 1993Junichi Komoriset the record to 28 in a Dutch league match, a feat repeated by Ceulemans in 1998 in the same league.[10]In 2012Roland Forthommetied the record in Zundert.[11]In the 2013 European Championships in Brandenburg, Germany,Frederic Caudronbecame the fourth member of the "28" club.[12]Ceulemans reputedly had a high run of 32 in a non-tournament, non-exhibition match.[10]The highest run so far in aWorld Cup matchis 26, set byTorbjorn Blomdahlon 26 May 2023 inHo Chi Minh City,Vietnam.[13]When allowing for interruptions by opponents starting new games, the current record high run is 34 by the DutchmanDick Jaspers: in his 2008 European Championship Final match against the SwedeTorbjörn Blomdahl, played in three games of 15 points each, he ended Game One by going 13 and out, ran 15 and out in the only inning of Game Two (started by Blomdahl), and ran six in his first inning of Game Three.[14][15]

The best game at the standard 50 points in a league is six innings (8.333 average) byEddy Merckx(count:4-9-26-7-0-4) in the German Bundesliga in 2011.[16]The best such game in a tournament is nine innings (5.555 average) byTorbjörn Blomdahlin 2000, while South Korean and later U.S. national championSang Leescored 50 points in four innings (count: 19-11-9-11, a 12.5 average) in ahandicappedgame at Sang Lee Billiards inQueens, New York.[2]

The best tournament match average is 5.625 (45 in eight innings over three games; i.e. only five misses), scored by Dick Jaspers in the above-mentioned European Cup finals inFlorange, France, in 2008. His opponent Blomdahl averaged 3.0 in his losing effort.[17]The highest average at an international tournament is 2.537 (345 caramboles in 136 innings) by Dick Jaspers in 2002 at a seven-match Crystal Kelly tournament inMonaco,[18]while Jaspers reached a record average of 2.666 (200 caramboles in 75 innings) at a four-match national tournament inVeldhovenin 2005.[19]

Raymond Ceulemansfrom Belgium has won 21UMB World Three-cushion Championships.[20]

The principal governing body of the sport is theUnion Mondiale de Billard(UMB). It had been staging world three-cushion championships since the late 1920s.[21]It is a member organization of theWorld Confederation of Billiard Sports. From 1985 to 1999, theBilliards World Cup Association(BWA) organized theThree-Cushion World Cupwith UMB, but later shut down due to financial problems, with UMB assuming full responsibility for the tournament.[22]

The game was featured in the 1959 animatedDisneyshort filmDonald in Mathmagic Land, in which Donald Duck attempts to learn the game by mastering thediamond system, which uses the diamond markings on the rails as a guide for calculating where the cue ball will strike based on player aim andcueing technique. The game also features prominently in the 2007Goya Award-winning Spanish filmSeven Billiard Tables(Siete mesas de billar francés), about a woman who inherits a troubled billiard hall and is searching for her missing husband. An opening theme for an anime ofLupin IIIshowsLupinandJigenplaying three-cushion billiards.