2026
OFFICIAL
RULEBOOK

2026 USA PICKLEBALL
OFFICIAL RULEBOOK
USA Pickleball was organized to perpetuate the growth and
advancement of pickleball on a national level and to set goals
for worldwide play and recognition. USA Pickleball is committed
to furthering the growth and development of pickleball among
all players.
USA Pickleball published the sport’s first official rulebook in
March 1984.
USA Pickleball is the National Governing Body of American pickleball
that formulates and interprets all the rules of the sport in a manner
that preserves the traditional nature and character of the sport and
the skills traditionally required to play the sport. All such decisions
by USA Pickleball are final and cannot be appealed.
The purpose of the rulebook is to provide pickleball players with the
rules necessary for standard play (recreational, social, organized
league), and tournament play. Part I and Part II of this rulebook are
applicable to all play, both standard play and tournament play. Part
III modifies the standard play rules in Part II and is designed to be
used in the conduct of USA Pickleball sanctioned tournaments. Part
IV contains standard play and tournament play rules for players with
disabilities and modifies the rules in Part II and Part III. A sanctioned
tournament allows players to obtain a rating on a national or
international basis.
Non-sanctioned tournaments may also use these rules as guidelines.
Directors of non-sanctioned tournaments may be flexible in the use
of these guidelines to better fit the skills, ages, and diversity of their
ii
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

players. It is recommended that non-sanctioned tournaments follow
this rulebook to prevent player confusion in future events. USA
Pickleball enthusiastically encourages these non-sanctioned
tournaments to promote knowledge and growth of the sport, as well
as skill development, while having fun playing pickleball.
These rules will not be changed without good cause. Comments and
opinions are always welcome. If you have any questions about the
rules, please go to the USA Pickleball website: usapickleball.org
USA Pickleball
Website: usapickleball.org
Cover Photo and Design Credit: USA Pickleball
2010©; revised 2026© All rights reserved. Any dissemination,
distribution, publication, or copying of these rules without the
express written consent of USA Pickleball Association is strictly
prohibited.
The USA Pickleball Association logo is a registered trademark of USA
Pickleball Association and use in any manner is prohibited unless
written approval is obtained from the organization.
For more information about pickleball and ordering bulk copies of
the Official Rules of USA Pickleball, contact: info@usapickleball.org
iii
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part I Introduction to Pickleball
Section 1 The Game ....................................................... 1
Section 2 Definitions ...................................................... 2
Section 3 Court and Equipment .................................... 5
Part II General Rules of Play
Section 4 Point Scoring ............................................... 11
Section 5 Player Positions and Serving Sequence ..... 12
Section 6 Player Readiness and Calling the Score ...... 14
Section 7 Serving ......................................................... 16
Section 8 Line Calls ...................................................... 19
Section 9 Dead Balls, Faults, and Hinders .................. 21
Section 10 Rally Situations ............................................ 23
Section 11 Non-Volley Zone Infractions. ....................... 25
Section 12 The Paddle During Play ............................... 26
Section 13 The Net & Net Support System During Play
..................................................................... 27
Section 14 Variations on Standard Pickleball ............... 30
Part III Tournament Play
Section 15 Tournament Event and Scoring Options .... 32
Section 16 Tournament Director Responsibilities ........ 37
Section 17 Referee Responsibilities .............................. 39
Section 18 Player Pre-Match Responsibilities .............. 42
Section 19 Tournament Line Calls ................................ 44
i
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 20 Tournament Match Situations .................... 47
Section 21 Time-Outs and Breaks ................................. 52
Section 22 Unsportsmanlike Conduct and Related
Penalties ...................................................... 57
Section 23 Retirements and Withdrawals ..................... 62
Section 24 Non-Officiated Tournament Play ................ 64
Part IV Rules for Inclusive Play
Section 25 Wheelchair, Adaptive Standing and Hybrid
Doubles Play ................................................ 65
Appendix A Faults and Replays ....................................... 72
Appendix B Rulebook Priorities and Guiding Principles 78
Index ...................................................................................... 83
ii
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Part I Introduction to Pickleball
Section 1 The Game
Pickleball is a paddle sport that combines elements of badminton, table
tennis, and tennis. It is played using a special perforated ball on a 20-foot
by 44-foot court with a tennis type net. The court is divided into right and
left service courts and a non-volley zone on each end of the net (Figure 3-1).
Pickleball can be played as singles or doubles.
In standard pickleball, the ball is served diagonally across the net to the
opposite service court on the opponent’s end, using an approved motion.
The ball is then hit back and forth across the net until a player fails to return
the ball in accordance with the rules.
Standard pickleball uses a scoring method where points are scored only
when the serving team wins the rally. The server alternates service courts
and continues to serve until they lose a rally (commit a fault). Typically, the
first player or team scoring 11 points and leading by at least a 2-point
margin wins the game.
Rally scoring has been provisionally approved as an option (Rule 14.A),
wherein a point is scored by the team that wins each rally. Mini-singles
(Rule 14.B) is a half-court variation of standard singles.
Unique Features
Two-Bounce Rule. After the serve, the receiver must allow the ball to
bounce before making their first return, and then the serving team must
allow the ball to bounce before making their first return.
Non-Volley Zone. The non-volley zone is the area of the court that
extends 7 feet from the net on each end of the court, within which a player
is not allowed to hit the ball out of the air before it bounces.
Wheelchair and Adaptive Play. Players using wheelchairs and players
having certain disabilities may allow the ball to bounce twice before
returning the ball. The first bounce must be in the court, but the second
bounce can be anywhere on the playing surface.
1
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Underlying Principles
Pickleball is a game that requires cooperation and courtesy. A sense of fair
play by giving the opponent the benefit of any doubt is essential in
maintaining the game’s underlying principles of fun and competition.
• All points played are treated the same regardless of their importance: the
first point of the match is as important as match point.
• Either partner in doubles can make calls, especially line calls.
• Calls are made promptly to preserve fair play and prevent players from
making delayed calls for their own advantage.
• Players strive to cooperate when confronted with a situation not covered
by the Rulebook. Resolutions can be made by asking for a referee to
resolve a dispute. allowing the rally to stand, or in extreme cases, a replay
of the rally.
• Where possible, rules accommodate players with various adaptive needs.
• Players avoid wearing clothing that closely matches the ball color.
• Players should not question or comment on an opponent’s call except
through an appeal to a referee.
Section 2 Definitions
Ball In Play. The timeframe during which a rally is played, from when the serve is
hit until the ball becomes dead.
Carry. Hitting the ball in such a way that it does not bounce away from the paddle
but is carried along on the face of the paddle.
Coaching. Communication of information (including verbal, nonverbal, and
electronic) from someone other than a player’s partner, that players may act upon
to gain an advantage or help them avoid a rules violation.
Court. The area inside the outer dimensions of the baselines and sidelines.
Dead Ball. A ball that is no longer in play.
Distraction. Physical actions by a player that are not common to the game and
interfere with the opponent’s ability or concentration to hit the ball. Examples
include, but are not limited to, making loud noises, stomping feet, and
waving the paddle in an erratic manner.
2
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Double Bounce. When the ball bounces twice on one end of the net before it is
returned.
Double Hit. Hitting the ball twice before it is returned.
Drop Serve. A serve made by dropping the ball and hitting the ball with the paddle
after the ball bounces on the playing surface.
Ejection. Removal of a player from tournament competition for a flagrant or
injurious behavioral violation.
Expulsion. Banishment of a player from the tournament venue for a flagrant or
injurious behavioral violation.
Fault. A rules violation that results in a dead ball and the loss of a rally.
First Server (Doubles). The player who begins the team’s service rotation from
the right serving area after a side out.
Forfeit. The awarding of a game or a match to the opponent due to a violation of
the rules.
Hinder. Any transient element or occurrence not caused by a player that adversely
impacts play. Examples include, but are not limited to, stray balls, flying insects,
foreign material, players, or officials on another court that impacted a player’s
ability to make a play on the ball. (Permanent objects are not hinders.)
Imaginary Extension. The continuation of a line beyond its actual,
physical endpoint, as if the line were projected further even though it is not
drawn or present.
Line Call. An audible or visual signal that a ball in play has not landed in the
required court area.
Live Ball. The timeframe from the start of the score call until the ball becomes
dead.
Momentum. A property of a body in motion that causes a player to continue in
motion after contacting the ball. The act of volleying produces momentum that
ends when the player regains balance and control of their motion or stops moving
toward the non-volley zone.
Non-Volley Zone. The 7-foot by 20-foot area of the court on each end of the net
where players are not allowed to volley the ball. (See Rule 3.A.4.c for specifications.)
3
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Officiating Team. Personnel under the leadership of the Tournament Head
Referee on or off the playing surface, including Lead and Second Referees, Tracking
Referee, Video Replay Referee, and Line Judges.
Paddle Grip Adjustments. Non-mechanical devices that change the size of the
grip or stabilize a player’s hand on the grip.
Paddle Head. The paddle, excluding the handle.
Permanent Object. Any object on, above, or near the court that can interfere
with play. Examples include, but are not limited to ceilings, walls, fencing, lighting
fixtures, net posts (including connected wheels, arms, and legs). Net cable or rope
on top of the net post, and other net support construction. Stands and seats for
spectators, the referee, line judges, spectators when in their recognized positions,
and all other objects around and above the court.
Plane of the Net. The vertical plane in line with the net extending above, below,
and to both sides of the net.
Playing Surface. The court and the area surrounding the court designated for
playing.
Profanity. Words, phrases, or gestures commonly considered to be vulgar or
inappropriate in public or around children. Typically included are words used as
expletives or verbal intensifiers.
Rally. Continuous play that occurs after the serve is hit and before the ball
becomes dead.
Receiver. The player who returns the serve.
Replay. The restart of a rally without the awarding of a point or changing of the
server.
Retirement. A singles player or doubles team’s decision to discontinue playing in
a match in progress.
Second Serve (Doubles). A term used to describe the serving condition after the
first server loses their serve.
Second Server (Doubles). The first server’s partner. The second server serves
after the first server loses serve.
Serve. The initial strike of the ball with the paddle to start a rally.
4
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Server. The player who initiates a rally by serving the ball.
Service Court. The area of the court on either side of the centerline, excluding the
non-volley zone. (See Rule 3.A.4.f for specifications.)
Serving Area. The area behind the baseline on each end of the court. (See Rule
3.A.4.g for specifications.)
Side Out. The awarding of the serve to the opposing team after a singles player or
doubles team loses its serve.
Starting Server (Doubles). For each doubles team, the player designated to
serve first at the start of a game.
Technical Foul. A one-point penalty assessed for extreme unsportsmanlike
actions or behaviors.
Technical Warning. A punitive warning assessed for minor unsportsmanlike
actions or behaviors.
Verbal Warning. A non-punitive caution for minor unsportsmanlike behavior,
usually given in advance of assessing a technical warning or technical foul for such
behavior.
Volley. A strike of the ball before the ball bounces.
Volley Serve. A serve made by hitting the released ball with the paddle before the
ball bounces on the playing surface.
Volleying, Act of. The act of volleying begins when the ball is hit out of the air
before bouncing (i.e., volleyed) and ends when the player’s movement from the
follow-through action (i.e., momentum) stops.
Withdrawal. A singles player’s or doubles team’s decision to be removed from all
upcoming play in a specified bracket.
Section 3 Court and Equipment
3.A Court Specifications. The dimensions and measurements for the standard
pickleball court are shown in Figure 3-1.
5
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Figure 3-1: Court Specifications
3.A.1 Court Dimensions. The court must be a rectangle measuring 20
feet (6.10 m) wide and 44 feet (13.41 m) long for both singles and
doubles matches. (See Figure 3-1.)
3.A.2 Court Measurements. Court measurements must be made to the
outside edge of the perimeter and non-volley zone lines.
3.A.3 Playing Surface. The minimum playing surface area is 30 feet
(9.14 m) wide and 60 feet (18.29 m) long. Other recommendations
for playing surface dimensions are:
Purpose Width – feet Length – feet
(meters) (meters)
New Construction 34 ft (10.36 m) 64 ft (19.5 m)
6
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Tournament Play 34 ft (10.36 m) 64 ft (19.5 m)
Stadium Court 50 ft (15.24 m) 80 ft (24.38 m)
3.A.4 Lines and Areas. The lines and areas of the standard pickleball
court are described in Rules 3.A.4.a through 3.A.4.g. (See Figure 3-
1.)
3.A.4.a Baselines. The lines parallel to the net at each end of
the court.
3.A.4.b Sidelines. The two lines bounding the court that are
perpendicular to the net and baselines.
3.A.4.c Non-Volley Zone. The 7-foot by 20-foot (2.13.m by
6.08 m) area of the court adjacent to each end of the
net. The non-volley zone lines run parallel to the net, 7
feet (2.13 m) from the net on each end between the
two sidelines. All lines that bound the non-volley zone
are part of the zone. The non-volley zone is two-
dimensional and does not extend above the playing
surface.
3.A.4.d Centerline. The line down the center of the court on
each end of the court extending from the non-volley
zone line to the baseline. The centerline separates the
right and left service courts.
3.A.4.e Line Size and Color. All lines should be 2 inches (5.08
cm) wide and the same color, clearly contrasting with
the color of the playing surface and court.
3.A.4.f Service Courts. The areas on each end of the court
between the non-volley zone and the baseline on
either side of the centerline. The right and left service
courts are bounded by and include their adjacent
baseline, sideline, and the centerline.
3.A.4.g Serving Areas. The areas behind the baseline on each
end of the court. The right and left serving areas are
bounded by and include the imaginary extensions of
their adjacent sideline and the centerline.
3.B Net Specifications. The requirements for the net and related elements are
set forth in Rules 3.B.1 through 3.B.7.
7
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

3.B.1 Material. The net may be made of any mesh fabric material that
will not allow a ball to pass through it.
3.B.2 Posts. Net posts should be 22 feet +/- 1.0 inches (6.71 m) from the
inside of one post to the inside of the other post. The maximum
diameter of the net posts should be 3 inches (7.62 cm).
3.B.3 Size. The net length should be at least 21 feet 9 inches (6.63 m),
extending from one post to the other. The net measurement from
the bottom edge of the net to the top should be at least 30 inches
(76.2 cm).
3.B.4 Edging. The top of the net should be edged with a 2-inch (5.08 cm)
white tape binding over a cord or cable running through the
binding. This binding must rest upon the cord or cable.
3.B.5 Center Strap. A strap may be placed at the center of the net
(centered 10 feet from the outside edge of the sidelines) to enable
adjustment to the required center net height.
3.B.6 Sideline Net Height. The top of the net must be 36 inches +/- 0.25
inch (91.44 cm +/- 0.635 cm) above the playing surface where the
net crosses the outer edge of the sidelines. (See Figure 3-1.)
3.B.7 Center Net Height. The top of the net must be 34 inches +/- 0.25
inch (86.36 cm +/- 0.635 cm) above the playing surface at the center
point of the court. If there is a center strap, the center net height
measurement includes the center strap. (See Figure 3-1.)
3.C Ball Specifications. The requirements for the ball are set forth in Rules 3.C.1
through 3.C.5. The complete list of approved balls is posted on the USA
Pickleball website.
3.C.1 Usage. All approved balls are acceptable for indoor or outdoor
play. (See Figure 3-2.)
3.C.2 Design. The design of the ball must be approved by USA Pickleball
as detailed in the Equipment Standards Manual. USA Pickleball
Equipment Standards Manual
3.C.3 Color. The ball must be one uniform color, except for identification
markings. Colors may vary.
3.C.4 Brand Identification. The ball must have a manufacturer or
supplier name or logo printed or embossed on the surface.
3.C.5 Construction. The ball must be made of durable material molded
with a smooth surface and free of texturing. The ball may have a
8
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

slight ridge at the seam, as long as it does not significantly impact
the ball’s flight characteristics. (See Figure 3-2.)
The ball with larger holes is customarily used
for indoor play (pictured on the left). The ball
with smaller holes is customarily used for
outdoor play (pictured on the right).
Figure 3-2: Approved Balls – Examples
3.D Paddle Specifications. The requirements for the paddle are set forth in
Rules 3.D.1 through 3.D.7. The complete list of approved paddles is posted
on the USA Pickleball Approved Paddle List.
3.D.1 Brand and Model Identification. The manufacturer must have a
clearly marked brand and model name or model number on the
paddle and must also include the ‘USA Pickleball Approved’ seal or
text treatment. Paddles that were manufactured prior to the seal
or text treatment requirement must still be on the USA Pickleball
approved paddle list for sanctioned play.
3.D.2 Dimensions. The combined length and width of the paddle,
including any edge guard and butt cap, must not exceed 24 inches
(60.96 cm). The paddle length must not exceed 17 inches (43.18
cm). There is no restriction on paddle thickness.
3.D.3 Weight. There is no restriction on paddle weight.
3.D.4 Material. The paddle must be made of material deemed safe and
not prohibited by these rules. Paddles must be made of rigid, non-
compressible material meeting the criteria specified in the USA
Pickleball Equipment Standards Manual.
3.D.5 Prohibited Surface Features. The paddle’s hitting surface must
not contain:
9
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

3.D.5.a Holes, cracks, delamination, or indentations that break
the paddle skin or surface.
3.D.5.b Rough texturing.
3.D.5.c Sandpaper characteristics.
3.D.5.d Natural or synthetic rubber.
3.D.5.e Moving parts that can increase head momentum.
3.D.5.f Anti-skid paint, paint textured with sand, rubber
particles, vinyl compounds, or any material that causes
additional spin.
3.D.5.g Any other objects or features that allow a player to
impart excessive spin on the ball.
3.D.5.h A reflective finish that might adversely affect the vision
of opposing players.
3.D.6 Allowable Alterations. Altered paddles must meet all
specifications. The only allowable alterations or additions by a
player to a commercially produced paddle as certified are:
3.D.6.a Addition or replacement of edge guard tape (see Rule
3.D.7).
3.D.6.b Addition of weighted tape (see Rule 3.D.7).
3.D.6.c Addition or removal of weights for an Original
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) integrated weight
system.
3.D.6.d Replacement of OEM interchangeable grips.
3.D.6.e Replacement of OEM interchangeable paddle faces.
3.D.6.f Addition of name decals or other identification
markings on the paddle face (see Rule 3.D.7).
3.D.6.g Changes to the grip size via inserts.
3.D.6.h Addition or replacement of grip wrap.
3.D.6.i Handwritten pen markings on the paddle surface for
identification purposes only (name, signature, phone,
email address), or an autograph. No aftermarket
graphics are allowed on a commercially made paddle.
3.D.7 Decals and Tape. Decals and tape on the paddle face must not
extend more than 1.0 inch (2.54 cm) above the top of the grip nor
more than 0.5 inch (1.27 cm) inside the outer edge of the paddle or,
if an edge guard is in place, 0.5 inch (1.27 cm) inside the edge
guard.
10
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Part II General Rules of Play
Part II (Sections 4 through 14) applies to standard pickleball play. Section
14 provides format variations to standard play.
See Part III for additional rules that apply to tournament play.
Part IV for additional rules that apply to players with physical limitations.
Section 4 Point Scoring
4.A Standard Scoring. A point is scored by serving the ball and winning the
rally. (See Rule 14.A.2 for the rally scoring option.)
4.B Winning the Game. The first singles player or doubles team that scores the
winning point wins the game.
11
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 5 Player Positions and Serving
Sequence
5.A Singles. The correct positions of the server and receiver are determined by
the server’s score.
5.A.1 Server Position. When the server’s score is zero or even, the serve
must be made from the right serving area and be received in the
opponent’s right service court. When the server’s score is odd, the
serve must be made from the left serving area and be received in
the opponent’s left service court. (See Rule 14.B.2 for mini-singles.)
5.A.2 Holding Serve. A player continues to serve, alternating right and
left serving areas after each point won, until the player loses a rally.
5.A.3 Side Out. A side out occurs after the server loses a rally.
5.B Doubles. Both players on a team will serve before a side out is declared,
except at the start of each game when only the starting server will serve as a
second server before a side out is declared.
5.B.1 Correct Server and Receiver. For each rally, the correct server
must serve from the correct serving area, and the correct receiver
must receive the serve. (See Rule 14.B for rally scoring.)
5.B.2 Designation of First and Second Servers. After each side out,
service begins with the player correctly positioned on the right side
according to the team’s score. For the duration of that team’s
service rotation, this player is designated as the first server and
their partner is the second server. The starting server for the team
that starts each game is designated as a second server for the
team’s first service rotation of that game.
5.B.3 Correct Serving and Receiving Positions. The correct positions of
the server and receiver for each rally are determined by their
team’s score. When serving or receiving, the starting server's
correct position is on the right side of the court when their team’s
score is zero or even, and on the left side of the court when their
score is odd. When serving or receiving, the starting server’s
partner's correct position is on the left side of the court when their
team’s score is zero or even and on the right side of the court when
their score is odd.
5.B.4 Player Positions During Rallies. Except while serving and
receiving, there is no restriction on the position of the players, on
12
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

or off the court, as long as they are on their respective end of the
net while the ball is live, except when a player crosses the plane of
the net as allowed in Rule 13.I.
5.B.5 Duration of First Server. The first server serves,
alternating between right and left serving areas after each point is
won, until the serving team loses a rally. The serve then passes to
the second server.
5.B.6 Duration of Second Server. The second server serves,
alternating between right and left serving areas after each point is
won, until the serving team loses a rally, which results in a side out.
5.C Questions About Correct Server, Receiver, and Positions. Before the serve
is hit, a player may ask their opponent who is the correct server or receiver,
or whether players are in the correct positions. The opponent must respond
with the appropriate information.
5.C.1 Player or Position Error Claimed During Rally. Any player may
stop a rally to claim an incorrect server, incorrect receiver, or
incorrect player position.
5.C.1.a Replay – Correct Claim. If the correct server or correct
receiver is not in their correct position when the score
is called and a player stops the rally to correctly
identify the player or position error, the rally must be
replayed.
5.C.1.b Fault – Incorrect Claim. When a player stops a rally
and incorrectly identifies a player or position error, it is
a fault against the player who stopped the rally.
5.C.1.c Fault – Incorrect Receiver. When the correct server
and correct receiver are in their correct positions when
the score is called, it is a fault against a player who
returns the serve but is not the correct receiver, even if
the rally is completed before the fault is called. The
fault must be called before the next serve.
5.C.2 Player or Position Error Identified After Rally. When the correct
server or correct receiver is not in their correct position when the
score is called and the rally is completed, the result of the rally
stands.
13
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 6 Player Readiness and Calling the
Score
6.A Readiness. Before the start of the score call, any player may signal they are
not ready to start play.
6.A.1 “Not Ready” Signals. Players must use one of the following
signals to indicate “not ready” 1. Raising the paddle above the
head. 2 Raising the non-paddle hand above the head 3. Completely
turning their back to the net.
6.A.2 Invalid “Not Ready” Signals. After the start of the score call, “not
ready” signals are not valid while the ball is live except to indicate
hinders.
6.B Calling the Score. The score must not be called until the server and receiver
are (or should be) in position and all players are (or should be) ready to play.
The server normally calls the score.
6.B.1 Singles. For singles play, the score must be called as two numbers:
server’s score, then receiver’s score. To start each game, the score
will be called as “zero – zero.”
6.B.2 Doubles. For doubles play, the score must be called as three
numbers: serving team’s score, then receiving team’s score, then
the server number. To start each game, the score will be called as
“zero – zero – two.”
6.B.2.a Score Call by Partner (Doubles). When a server is
unable to call the score, the server’s partner may call
the score. The same player must call the score
throughout the entire game unless the player’s voice
becomes impaired.
6.C When to Serve. The entire score must be called before the server hits the
serve.
6.C.1 Fault – Early Serve. When the server hits the serve while the score
is being called, it is a fault against the server.
6.D 10-Second Rule. The server must serve the ball within 10 seconds after the
score call is completed.
6.D.1 Fault – 10-Second Violation. When the server does not serve
within 10 seconds after the score is called, it is a fault against the
server.
14
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

6.D.2 Replay – Player Repositioning. When the serving team changes
serving areas after the score has been called, the server must allow
all players to reposition, and then the score must be re-called to
restart the 10-second count.
6.E Stop Play Indicators. After the start of the score call, verbal indicators to
stop play such as “stop” and “wait” will be recognized.
6.E.1 Question About the Score. Before the serve is hit, a player may
ask their opponent for the correct score. The opponent must
respond with the appropriate information.
6.F Challenging the Score Call. A player may stop a rally to ask for a score
correction before the return of serve is hit and before the ball becomes dead.
6.F.1 Replay – Incorrect Score Called. When an incorrect score is called
and the rally is stopped before the return of serve and before the
ball becomes dead, the rally must be replayed with the correct
score called.
6.F.2 Fault – Correct Score Called. When a player stops a rally to
challenge a correct score call, it is a fault against the player who
stopped the rally.
6.F.3 Fault – Late Challenge to Score Call. When a player stops a rally
to ask for a score correction after the return of serve is hit, it is a
fault against the player who stopped the rally.
6.F.4 Incorrect Score Identified After Rally. When an incorrect score
was called and the rally is completed, the result of the rally stands,
and the score must be corrected before the next serve.
15
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 7 Serving
7.A Server Positioning. When the serve is hit, the server must be in compliance
with Rules 7.A.1, 7.A.2 and 7.A.3.
7.A.1 Grounded. At least one of the server’s feet must be in contact with
the correct serving area when the serve is hit.
7.A.1.a Fault – Server Not Grounded. When both server’s feet
are off the playing surface when the serve is hit, it is a
fault against the server.
7.A.2 Outside Court. Neither of the server’s feet is allowed to be in
contact with the court when the serve is hit.
7.A.2.a Fault – Server Contacting Court. If a server’s foot is in
contact with the court when the serve is hit, it is a fault
against the server.
7.A.3 In Serving Area. Neither of the server’s feet is allowed to be in
contact with the playing surface outside the correct serving area
when the serve is hit.
7.A.3.a Fault – Server Outside Serving Area. If a server’s foot is
in contact with the playing surface outside the correct
serving area when the serve is hit, it is a fault against the
server.
7.B Ball Release. The server must comply with Rules 7.B.1 through 7.B.3 when
releasing the ball to make the serve.
7.B.1 Release from Hand or Paddle. The server must release the ball
using only one hand or only the paddle.
7.B.2 No Manipulation or Spin Upon Release. Some natural rotation of
the ball is expected during any release of the ball. The server must
not manipulate the ball to add spin with any part of the server's
body or the paddle prior to hitting the ball to make the serve,
except that the server may allow the ball to roll off the face of the
paddle by gravity. Spin may be applied to the ball upon contact by
the paddle.
7.B.2.a Replay – Manipulation or Spin Added. When the
receiver determines that the server has imparted
manipulation or spin during the release of the ball, the
16
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

receiver may call for a replay, but only before returning
the serve.
7.B.3 Visible Release. The server’s release of the ball must be visible to
the receiver.
7.B.3.a Replay – Ball Release Not Visible. When the receiver
cannot see the release of the ball, the receiver may call
for a replay, but only before the return of serve.
7.C Volley Serve. The service motion for a volley serve must comply with Rules
7.C.1 through 7.C.4.
7.C.1 Upward Arc. The server’s paddle must be moving in a clear
upward arc when the paddle contacts the ball.
7.C.2 Paddle Head. The highest point of the paddle head must clearly
not be above the highest part of the server’s wrist joint when the
paddle contacts the ball.
7.C.3 Ball Height. The ball must clearly be no higher than the server’s
waist when the paddle contacts the ball.
7.C.4 Forehand or Backhand. The serve can be made with a forehand or
backhand motion.
7.C.5 Fault – Illegal Volley Serve. When the server violates Rule 7.C.1,
7.C.2, or 7.C.3, it is a fault against the server.
7.D Drop Serve. A drop serve is made by dropping the ball and hitting the ball
with the paddle after the ball bounces on the playing surface. The service
motion for a drop serve must comply with Rules 7.D.1 through 7.D.5.
7.D.1 Release Position. The server must release the ball from a natural
(unaided) height.
7.D.2 Release Force. When releasing the ball, the ball must not be
propelled in any direction or in any manner prior to hitting the
serve.
7.D.3 Number of Bounces. Before the server hits the ball to make the
serve, there is no restriction on how many times the ball can
bounce.
7.D.4 Bounce Location. Before the server hits the ball to make the serve,
there is no restriction on where the ball bounces on the playing
surface.
17
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

7.D.5 Forehand or Backhand. The serve can be made with a forehand or
backhand motion.
7.D.6 Fault – Illegal Drop Serve. When the server violates Rule 7.D.1 or
7.D.2, it is a fault against the server.
7.E Serve Placement. The server must serve to the service court diagonally
opposite their correct position. (See Rule 14.B.3 for mini-singles.) The served
ball must clear the opponent’s non-volley zone, with or without touching the
net, and land in the correct service court.
7.E.1 Fault – Serve Lands Out of Bounds. When a served ball lands
outside the correct service court, it is a fault against the server.
7.E.2 Fault – Serve Lands in Non-Volley Zone. When a served ball lands
in the non-volley zone, it is a fault against the server.
7.E.3 Fault – Serve Hits Permanent Object. When a served ball
contacts a permanent object before landing, it is a fault against the
server.
7.E.4 Fault – Serve Hits Server or Server’s Partner. When a served ball
contacts the server or server’s partner or anything that is worn or
carried by either, it is a fault against the server.
7.E.5 Fault – Serve Hits Receiver or Receiver’s Partner. When a served
ball contacts the receiver or receiver’s partner or anything that is
worn or carried by either, before landing, it is a fault against the
receiver.
18
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 8 Line Calls
8.A Line Calling Responsibility. Players are responsible for making “out” calls
for all lines on their end of the court. In doubles, either or both partners may
make a line call.
8.B “In” Ball. A served ball that clears the opponent’s non-volley zone line and
lands in the correct service court is “in.” A ball returned by a player that
lands on the opponent’s end of the court is “in.”
8.C “Out” Ball. A served ball that does not land in the correct service court on
the opponent’s end of the court, including one that lands on the non-volley
zone line, is “out.” Any other ball that lands outside the court is “out.”
8.D Code of Ethics for Line Calling. When making line calls, players must strive
for accuracy and operate under the principle that all questionable calls must
be resolved in favor of the opponent. The opponent gets the benefit of the
doubt on line calls made. Any ball that cannot be promptly called “out” must
be considered “in.”
8.E Line Call Certainty. Players must not call a ball “out” unless they can clearly
see a space between the line and the ball when it lands. (See Figure 8-1.)
Figure 8-1: Out Ball Illustration
8.F “Out” Call and Signal. Players must promptly signal an “out” ball audibly
by voice, visibly by a hand signal, or both.
19
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

8.F.1 Valid Line Call. Any “out” call made by a player after the ball lands
is a line call.
8.F.2 Dead Ball. A line call results in a dead ball and play must stop.
8.F.3 Out Call Timing. If a player returns the ball, their “out” call must
be made before the ball is hit by the opponent or before the ball
becomes dead; otherwise, play continues. If a player does not
return the ball, an “out" call made promptly will be recognized,
even if the ball becomes dead before the “out” call is made.
8.F.4 Partner Communication. While the ball is in the air, any
communication between partners about whether a ball might land
out is considered player communication, not a line call.
8.G Overriding a Call. Players may override a partner’s line call, their own line
call, or an “in” ruling to their own disadvantage.
8.H Partner Disagreement (Doubles). When partners disagree on a line call,
then conflict exists, and the team's call will be “in.”
8.I Requesting Opponent’s Opinion. A player may defer to the opponent any
line call that the player is responsible for making by asking the opponent’s
opinion up until the next serve is hit. When the opponent makes a clear “in”
or “out” decision, the opponent’s decision will stand. When the opponent
does not make a definitive call, the player’s call will stand or when no call
was made by the player, the ball will be considered “in.” After asking the
opponent, the player and the player’s partner lose the opportunity to make
the line call, except to override the call to favor the opponent.
8.J Spectator Involvement. Spectators must not be consulted on any call.
20
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 9 Dead Balls, Faults, and Hinders
9.A Stopping a Rally. Any action that stops play results in a dead ball.
9.A.1 Fault – Stopping a Rally. When a player stops a rally before the
ball otherwise becomes dead, it is a fault against the player unless
the stoppage is to call a hinder (see Rule 9.C), to correctly identify a
player position or server error (see Rule 5.C.1.a), or to ask for
correction of an incorrect score before the return of serve (see Rule
6.F.1).
9.B Faults. A called fault or a fault committed by a player results in a dead ball.
9.B.1 Fault Occurrence. A fault only occurs while the ball is live, except
for non-volley zone violations involving momentum. (See Rule
11.A.2.)
9.B.2 Fault Call Responsibility. Players are expected to call faults on
themselves or on their partner as soon as the fault is committed or
detected.
9.B.3 Calling Non-Volley Zone Faults and Service Foot Faults on
Opponent. Players may only call non-volley zone faults and service
foot faults on an opponent.
9.B.3.a Fault Call Timing. A fault should be called as soon as the
claimed fault is committed or detected. The fault must be
called before the serve is hit to begin the next rally.
9.B.3.b Disagreement Between Teams. When there is any
disagreement between teams about a fault call, the rally
must be replayed.
9.B.3.c Disagreement Between Partners. Any disagreement
between partners on a fault call will be decided to the
benefit of their opponents.
9.B.4 No Enforcement of Other Faults. If a player believes an opponent
has committed any type of fault other than a non-volley zone fault
or a service foot fault, they may mention the specific fault to the
opponent upon completion of the rally, but they have no authority
to enforce the fault. The final decision on fault resolution belongs
to the player that allegedly committed the fault.
9.C Hinders. A called hinder results in a dead ball.
9.C.1 Who Can Call Hinder. Any player may call a hinder.
21
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

9.C.2 Replay – Hinder. When a hinder is called, the rally must be
replayed.
22
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 10 Rally Situations
10.A Two-Bounce Rule. The serve and the return of serve must each bounce
before being returned.
10.A.1 Fault – No Bounce by Receiver. When the receiver does not allow
the serve to bounce before hitting the ball, it is a fault against the
receiver.
10.A.2 Fault – No Bounce by Serving Side. When the server or server’s
partner does not allow the return of serve to bounce before hitting
the ball, it is a fault against the serving side.
10.B Maximum Number of Bounces. A player must return the ball before a
second bounce.
10.B.1 Fault – Double Bounce. When a player fails to return a ball before
it bounces twice, it is a fault against the player.
10.C Returned Ball Placement. A player must return the ball so that the ball
lands on the opponent’s end of the court or contacts the opponent or
anything that is worn or carried by the opponent before the ball lands.
10.C.1 Fault – Ball Lands Out of Bounds. When a player hits a ball that
first lands outside the opponent’s end of the court, it is a fault
against that player.
10.C.2 Fault – Ball Lands on Player’s Side of Net. When a player hits a
ball that fails to cross the net and lands on the player’s side of the
net, it is a fault against that player.
10.C.3 Fault – Ball Hits Player. After the serve, when the ball contacts a
player or anything that is worn or carried by the player, except the
player’s paddle or the player’s hands below the wrist joint while in
contact with the paddle, it is a fault against that player.
10.C.4 Fault – Ball Hits Permanent Object Before Landing. When a
player hits a ball that contacts a permanent object before
bouncing on the court, it is a fault against that player.
10.C.5 Fault – Ball Hits Permanent Object After Landing. When a player
fails to return a ball that has bounced in the player’s court before
the ball contacts a permanent object, it is a fault against that
player.
10.D Double Hit. Balls can be hit more than once, but the stroke must be
continuous in a single direction by one player.
23
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

10.D.1 Fault – Double Hit. When a player hits a ball more than once using
a stroke that is not continuous and in a single direction, it is a fault
against that player.
10.D.2 Fault – Ball Hit by Two-Players. It is a fault if both a player and
their partner strike the ball while attempting to return it.
10.E Missed Shot. When a player completely misses hitting the ball, the ball
remains live.
10.F Distraction. A player must not distract their opponent when the opponent is
about to hit the ball.
10.G Damaged Ball. When a ball is or becomes broken, cracked, soft or degraded,
play must continue until the end of the rally. The ball will be replaced if all
players agree.
10.G.1 Replay – Broken or Cracked Ball. When all players agree that a
broken or cracked ball affected the outcome of the rally, the rally
must be replayed. If all players do not agree that a broken or
cracked ball affected the outcome of the rally, the result of the rally
stands.
10.G.2 No Replay – Soft or Degraded Ball. When a ball is or becomes
degraded or soft, the result of the prior rally stands.
10.H Injury. If a player is injured during a rally, play must continue until the end of
the rally.
10.I Player Equipment or Apparel Problem. If a player experiences an
equipment or apparel problem during a rally, play must continue until the
end of the rally.
10.J Item on Court. When anything that is worn or carried by a player lands on
the player’s end of the court (except when the item contacts the non-volley
zone as a result of the player volleying the ball (see Rule 11.A.1)), the ball
remains in play, even if the ball hits the item.
10.K Between Rallies. Players may quickly hydrate, towel off, and adjust
equipment and apparel between rallies as long as the flow of the game is not
adversely impacted.
24
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 11 Non-Volley Zone Infractions
11.A Allowable Contact. All volleys must be initiated outside of the non-volley
zone. A player, or anything in contact with the player, may contact the non-
volley zone at any time except during the act of volleying a ball.
11.A.1 Fault – Non-Volley Zone Contact While Volleying. When a
volleying player or anything that has contact with the volleying
player (including the player’s partner) contacts the non-volley
zone, it is a fault against the player.
11.A.2 Fault – Non-Volley Zone Momentum. When a volleying player’s
momentum causes the player to contact anything (including the
player’s partner) that is in contact with the non-volley zone, even
after the ball becomes dead, it is a fault against the volleying
player.
11.A.3 Fault – Failure to Exit the Non-Volley Zone Before Volleying.
After contacting the non-volley zone, when a player volleys a ball
before both feet contact the playing surface completely outside
the non-volley zone, it is a fault against the player.
25
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 12 The Paddle During Play
12.A One Paddle. A player must not use or carry more than one paddle during a
rally.
12.A.1 Fault – More Than One Paddle. When a player uses or carries
more than one paddle while the ball is in play, it is a fault against
the player.
12.B Paddle Possession. A player must have possession of the paddle when
hitting the ball. A player is allowed to hold the paddle with one or both
hands. The paddle may be switched from hand to hand at any time.
12.B.1 Fault – Paddle Not in Possession. When a player does not have
possession of the paddle when hitting the ball, it is a fault against
the player.
12.C Catch or Carry. A player must not catch or carry a ball on their paddle
during a rally.
12.C.1 Fault – Catch or Carry. When a player catches or carries a ball on
their paddle during a rally, it is a fault against the player.
26
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 13 The Net and Net Support
System During Play
13.A Ball Contacting Net. When the ball contacts the net, or the rope or cable at
the top of the net between the net posts, the ball remains in play.
13.A.1 Replay – Ball Contacts Net. When a returned ball that crosses the
net gets caught in the net, contacts a part of the net that is draping
on the ground, or contacts a deflecting net before or after
bouncing, the rally must be replayed.
13.B Ball Contacting Net Support System. A served ball must not contact any
part of the net support system. A returned ball must not contact any part of
the net support system on the hitting player’s end of the net.
13.B.1 Fault – Ball Contacts Net Support System. When a player serves a
ball that contacts the net support system on either end of the net
or returns a ball that contacts the net support system before going
over the net, it is a fault against the player.
13.B.2 Replay – Ball Affected by Net Support System. When a returned
ball crosses the net and contacts any part of a crossbar, or any
other part of the net support system within the court boundaries,
before or after the ball bounces, the rally must be replayed.
13.C Ball Around Net Post. A ball may be returned around the outside of the net
post.
13.D Ball Between Net and Net Post. A ball must not be hit between the net and
the net post.
13.D.1 Fault – Ball Between Net and Net Post. When a player hits the
ball between the net and the net post, it is a fault against the
player.
13.E Ball Under Net. A ball must not be hit under the net.
13.E.1 Fault – Ball Under Net. When a player hits the ball under the net, it
is a fault against the player.
13.F Ball Crossing Plane of Net. A ball must entirely cross to a player’s end of
the net before the player hits the ball.
13.F.1 Fault – Ball Hit Before Crossing Plane of Net. When a player hits
the ball before the ball entirely crosses the plane of the net to the
player’s end, it is a fault against the player.
27
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

13.G Player Contacting Net or Net Support System. A player or anything that is
worn or carried by the player must not contact the net or net support system
while the ball is live.
13.G.1 Fault – Player Contacts Net or Net Support System. When a
player or anything that is worn or carried by the player contacts the
net or net support system while the ball is live, it is a fault against
the player.
13.H Player Contacting Opponent or Opponent’s Court. A player or anything
that is worn or carried by the player must not contact their opponent or the
opponent’s end of the court while the ball is live.
13.H.1 Fault – Player Contacts Opponent or Opponent’s Court. When a
player or anything that is worn or carried by the player contacts
their opponent or the opponent’s end of the court while the ball is
live, it is a fault against the player.
13.I Player Crossing Plane of Net. A player or anything that is worn or carried by
the player must not cross the plane of the net when the ball is live, except as
provided for in Rules 13.I.1 and 13.I.2.
13.I.1 After Hitting the Ball. A player may cross the plane of the net
immediately after hitting the ball. The allowance to cross the plane
of the net only applies while executing the current strike of the ball
and for continuation associated with the current strike of the ball.
13.I.1.a Fault – Player Crosses Plane of Net Before Hitting
Ball. When any part of a player or anything that is worn
or carried by the player crosses the plane of the net
before the player hits the ball, it is a fault against the
player.
13.I.1.b Fault – Player Crosses Plane of Net Without Hitting
Ball. When any part of a player or anything that is worn
or carried by the player crosses the plane of the net
and the player does not hit the ball, it is a fault against
the player.
13.I.2 Ball Crosses Back to Opponent’s Side. When a ball bounces in the
court on the receiving player’s end of the net and then returns to
the opponent’s side of the net without being hit, the receiving
player may cross over, under, or around the net to hit the ball, but
only after the ball has first crossed back to the opponent’s end of
the net.
28
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

13.I.2.a Fault – Player Crosses Plane of Net Before Ball
Crosses. When a ball bounces in the court on the
receiving player’s end of the net and is returning to the
opponent’s end without being hit, it is a fault against
the player if the player crosses the plane of the net
before the ball crosses entirely.
13.I.2.b Fault – Ball Not Contacted. When a ball bounces in
the court on the receiving player’s end of the net and
then returns to the opponent’s end of the net without
being hit, it is a fault against a player who fails to hit
the ball before it bounces once on the opponent’s end
of the net.
13.J Replay – Net System Malfunction. When a net system malfunctions during
a rally, the rally must be replayed.
29
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 14 Variations on Standard
Pickleball
14.A (Provisional Rule) Rally Scoring Option. Rally scoring may be used for
singles and doubles.
14.A.1 Applicability of Rules. All standard rules for singles and doubles
apply except for the modifications included in this section.
14.A.2 Point Scoring. A point is scored by the singles player or doubles
team that wins each rally. (Modifies Rule 4.A)
14.A.3 Calling the Score. The score must be called as two numbers:
server’s score, then receiver’s score. (Modifies Rule 6.B.2)
14.A.4 Serving (Doubles). After each side out, service begins with the
player correctly positioned on the right side according to the
team’s score. The server will alternate serving areas after each
point is won, until a rally is lost . (Modifies Rule 5.B.2)
14.A.5 One Server (Doubles). Only one player on a team will serve before
a side out is declared. After the serving team loses the rally, a side
out will occur, and service is awarded to the opponent. (Modifies
Rules 5.B, 5.B.2, 5.B.5, 5.B.6)
14.B Mini-Singles. All standard singles rules apply to mini-singles except for the
modifications included in this section.
14.B.1 The Court. Mini-singles is played on a standard pickleball court.
(See Figure 3-1.)
14.B.1.a Court Area In Play. Only the right or left side on each
player’s end of the court is in play during each rally
based on each player’s respective score. (Modifies
Rules 3.A.4.c, 5.A.1)
14.B.1.b Boundary Lines. The boundary lines of the in-play side
of the court for a rally are the baseline, the respective
sideline, and the centerline of the court. The opposite
side of the court is out of bounds.
14.B.1.c Additional Court Line. An additional line must be
provided that extends the centerline of the court
through each non-volley zone. The color of the
additional line is not required to be the same as the
other court lines. (Modifies Rule 3.A.4.d)
30
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

14.B.2 Player Positions. The server’s and the receiver’s correct positions
for a rally are determined by their individual scores. (Modifies Rule
5.A)
14.B.3 Shot Placement. Each player’s served and returned balls must
land in bounds of the opponent’s side of the court that is in play.
31
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Part III Tournament Play
Part III (Sections 15 through 24) presents additional rules, and
modifications to rules in Part II, that apply to tournament play only.
Section 15 Tournament Event and Scoring
Options
15.A Event Categories.
Men’s: Singles and Doubles
Women’s: Singles and Doubles
Mixed: Doubles
Wheelchair: Singles and Doubles (See Section 25.A)
Adaptive Standing: Singles and Doubles (See Section 25.B)
Hybrid: Doubles (See Section 25.C)
15.A.1 Gender Events. In events categorized by gender, only members of
that gender are allowed to play in that event.
15.A.2 Open Gender and Age Events. Players of any gender and age are
allowed to play in an open gender and age event.
15.A.3 Doubles. A doubles team must consist of two players who meet
the classification requirements to participate in a particular
division of play.
15.A.3.a Mixed Doubles. A mixed doubles team must consist of
one male player and one female player.
15.A.3.b Skill-Rated Doubles Events. In a doubles event based
on player skill rating, the skill level of the higher-rated
team member determines a team’s skill rating for the
event.
15.A.3.c Age-Qualified Doubles Events. In a doubles event
qualified by ages 19 years and older (adult event), the
age of the younger team member determines a team’s
age classification for the event. Players may play in a
younger age adult event unless prohibited by the rules
of the National Senior Games Association.
15.A.4 Junior Events. Junior events are qualified by ages 18 and younger.
Players aged 18 years and younger may play in any adult event
32
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

when a junior event is not available or does not have enough
entrants, or with the Tournament Director’s permission.
15.B Event Formats. Matches may use any of the approved tournament formats.
15.B.1 Double Elimination. In a double elimination format, after losing
one match, a singles player or doubles team plays in a consolation
bracket. The player or team is eliminated from competition after
one loss in the consolation bracket. The winner of the consolation
bracket plays the winner of the winners’ bracket to determine first
place and second place. If the winner of the consolation bracket
defeats the winner of the winners’ bracket, then a tie-breaker
match to 15 points must be played to determine first place and
second place. The loser of the final match in the consolation
bracket wins third place.
15.B.2 Single Elimination with Consolation. In a single elimination with
consolation format, after losing one match, a singles player or
doubles team plays in a consolation bracket. The player or team is
eliminated from competition after one loss in the consolation
bracket. The final two players or teams in the winners’ bracket play
for first place and second place. The final two singles players or
doubles teams in the consolation bracket play for third place.
15.B.3 Single Elimination Without Consolation. (Pro and Senior Pro
Player Brackets) Single Elimination Without Consolation. The first
player/team to score the match-winning point by at least a two-
point margin wins. The final two players/teams in the winner’s
bracket play for the gold/first place and silver/second-place
medals. The determination of the final standings of the remaining
players/teams is left to the discretion of tournament officials.
15.B.4 Round Robin. All singles players or doubles teams play each other.
The winner is determined based on the highest number of matches
won. When two or more teams are tied for the number of matches
won, ties must be broken in accordance with the sequence in Rules
15.B.4.a through 15.B.4.f. The method that succeeds in breaking
the tie will be used to rank all tied teams.
15.B.4.a Withdrawal, Retirement, or Forfeit. When a singles
player or doubles team withdraws, retires, or is
forfeited from a round robin event, then that player’s
or team’s match results will not count toward the
standings of that event and the player or team will not
be eligible to participate in any elimination playoff or
33
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

medal match for that event. The match results will
count towards the player’s or team’s rating.
15.B.4.b First Tie-Breaker. The first tie-breaker is the best
record of head-to-head matches among the tied
teams.
15.B.4.c Second Tie-Breaker. The second tie-breaker is the
best point differential of all games played. This tie-
breaker does not apply across multiple pools where
the number of teams in each pool is not equal. (For
example, Team A wins their first match, 11-8, 11-4, so
they would have a point differential of +10. Team A
then wins the second match, 11-9, 2-11, 11-6. For the
second round, they would have a point differential of -
2. This would give them a total for the two rounds of
+8.)
15.B.4.d Third Tie-Breaker. The third tie-breaker is the best
point differential of head-to-head games.
15.B.4.e Fourth Tie-Breaker. The fourth tie-breaker is the best
point differential of games played against the singles
player or doubles team with the next -highest number
of matches won. (For example, when players or teams
are tied for second-place, the total point differential
against the first-place singles player or doubles team is
used.)
15.B.4.f Fifth Tie-Breaker. The fifth tie-breaker is the highest
number of points scored across all matches in the
round robin. This tie-breaker does not apply across
multiple pools where the number of teams in each
pool is not equal.
15.B.5 Pool Play. The singles players or doubles teams are divided into
two or more player pools. Each pool plays a round robin to seed
the players or teams for a single-elimination or double-elimination
playoff.
15.B.6 Non-Pool Play. After playing a round robin to determine seeding,
seeded singles players or doubles teams play a single-elimination
or double-elimination playoff, using a match format of two of three
games to 11 points, one game to 15 points, or one game to 21
points, all win by two points.
34
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

15.B.7 Team Play. Team play participants are designated by roster and
play can include gender singles, gender doubles, and mixed
doubles. Team play may use standard scoring or rally scoring for
both singles and doubles play.
15.C Tournament Match and Scoring Options. All scoring options are win by
two points, except win by one point is allowed for team play.
15.C.1 Standard Scoring Formats. The tournament standard scoring
options are:
15.C.1.a Best 2-of-3 games to 11 points.
15.C.1.b Best 3-of-5 games to 11 points.
15.C.1.c One game to 15 or 21 points.
15.C.1.d One game to 11 points (for round robin events with six
or more teams only).
15.C.2 (Provisional Rule) Rally Scoring Match Formats. The
Tournament Director has the option to use rally scoring except for
double-elimination doubles events, all 2026 USA Pickleball Golden
Ticket events, and the 2026 USA Pickleball National Championship
events. The tournament rally scoring options are:
15.C.2.a One game to 11 points, 15 points, or 21 points.
15.C.2.b Best 2-of-3 games to 11 points, 15 points, or 21 points.
15.C.2.c Best 3-of-5 games to 11 points, 15 points, or 21 points.
15.C.2.d For inclement weather considerations, the
Tournament Director may approve game scoring to 7
points with an end change at 4 points in a single-game
match or the tie-breaker game of a multiple-game
match.
15.D Scheduling Matches. A player is not permitted to enter multiple events
scheduled on the same day with an overlapping time duration.
15.E Draws and Seeding. A draw and seeding committee must rank the
players and teams and set up a fair draw in each event.
15.F Two-Match Minimum. Each player is entitled to participate in a minimum
of two scheduled matches per event entered except for a Single
Elimination Without Consolation event. (See Rule 15.B.3.)
35
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

15.G Error Corrections. Tournament Operations personnel have the authority
to correct any operational errors that result in incorrect scores, players on
courts, match results, bracket results, medal results, matches being
played, or future matches to be played.
36
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 16 Tournament Director
Responsibilities
16.A Overall Responsibility. The Tournament Director is responsible for the
tournament, designates the officials and their areas of responsibility, and
ensures that planned support is available.
16.B Designee Selection. The Tournament Director may designate a
representative to assume certain Director duties, but the Tournament
Director retains final decision-making authority.
16.C Event Formats. The Tournament Director or the tournament sponsor
typically selects the event formats. (See Rule 15.B.)
16.D Draw and Seeding Committee. The Tournament Director must appoint a
draw and seeding committee. (See Rule 15.E.)
16.E Notification of Hazards and Abnormal Conditions. Before the tournament,
the Tournament Director must notify players and referees of any unique
features, abnormal local conditions, or hazards associated with the courts.
When possible, players should be notified in writing as part of the pre-
tournament instructions. Referees must be notified at the venue.
16.F Local Rules and Exceptions. The Tournament Director must not implement
or impose any rule that is not provided in this Rulebook. Exceptions to the
rules because of physical limitations of the courts or other local conditions
must be approved in advance of the tournament by the USA Pickleball
Managing Director of Officiating.
16.G Ball Selection. The Tournament Director will choose the tournament ball
from the official list of approved balls posted on the USA Pickleball website.
16.H Starting Server Identification (Doubles). The Tournament Director will
provide a method of identifying each team’s starting server for each game.
16.I Line Judges. The Tournament Director will determine which matches will
use line judges.
16.J Removal of Referee or Line Judge. The Tournament Director has the final
authority to remove and replace members of the officiating team. (See Rules
20.K and 20.L.)
16.K Player Apparel Changes. The Tournament Director has the authority to
require players to change apparel. (See Rule 18.B.3 and 18.B.4.)
37
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

16.L Notice of Schedule Changes. When any change is made to the tournament
schedule of matches after the initial posting, the Tournament Director must
notify the players of the changes.
16.M Extending Time to Report to Match. The Tournament Director may allow
an extension of time for players to report to a match when circumstances
warrant.
16.N Court Changes. The Tournament Director may direct a court change during
a match after the completion of any game to accommodate better spectator
or playing conditions.
16.O Officiating Appeals. The Tournament Director must resolve player appeals
concerning officiating rulings. Decisions of the Tournament Director are
final.
16.P Player Misconduct. The Tournament Director has the authority to impose
warnings, technical fouls, and match forfeits and to eject or expel any player
for misconduct. (See Rules 22.A.3, 22.I and 22.K)
16.Q Partner Changes. The Tournament Director must approve any allowable
doubles partner changes. (See Rule 18.G.)
38
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 17 Referee Responsibilities
17.A Basic Duties. The referee is responsible for all decisions related to
procedural and judgment calls during a match.
17.B Pre-Match Checks. Before each match starts, the referee must:
17.B.1 Referee Tools. Check the availability and suitability of necessary
supplies for the match, such as balls, scoresheets, pencils, and a
timing device.
17.B.2 Court Conditions. Check the preparation of the court with respect
to cleanliness, lighting, net height, court markings, and hazards.
17.C Pre-Match Briefing. Before each match starts, the referee must meet with
the players at the court to:
17.C.1 Paddle Inspection. Inspect paddles for compliance with paddle
specifications. (See Rules 3.D, and 18.A.)
17.C.2 Rule Modifications and Hinders. Point out approved rule
modifications, court abnormalities, and non-standard court
conditions that could be potential safety issues.
17.C.3 Line Calling Duties. Instruct players on the line calling duties of
the referee, players, and line judges when applicable. This
requirement may be satisfied by the Tournament Director
providing pre-match instructions to the players. (See Section 19.)
17.C.4 Selection of Service and End. Use a fair method (e.g., selection of
a number [1 or 2] written on the back of the scoresheet, coin toss)
to determine which singles player or doubles team has first choice
of serving, receiving, selecting at which end of the court to start the
match, or deferring the first choice to their opponent. Once a
selection is made, it cannot be changed.
17.C.5 Starting Server Identification (Doubles). Ensure the starting
server for each team wears the required identification. (See Rule
18.C.)
17.D Officiating Play. During the match, the referee must:
17.D.1 Player and Position Confirmations. Confirm the correct server,
receiver, and player positions and correct the players if necessary.
39
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

17.D.2 Score Calls. Call the score to start each rally after confirming that
the correct server has the ball (see Rule 6.B). Calling the score
indicates to all players that play is ready to resume.
17.D.2.a Serving Area Change. Allow players to reposition
when the serving team changes serving areas after the
score has been called, and then re-call the score. (See
Rule 20.D.)
17.D.3 Point Calls. Call “point” after each point is awarded.
17.D.4 Second Server Calls (Doubles). Call “second server” (or “second
serve”) after the first server’s team loses a rally.
17.D.5 Side Out Calls. Announce “side out” when a singles player or
second server loses the serve.
17.D.6 Scoresheet Annotations. Appropriately annotate the scoresheet
after a rally is completed or a time-out is called.
17.D.7 Net Checks. Recheck the net height and position if the net is
disturbed.
17.D.8 Fault Calls. Identify and call rule violations when they occur.
17.D.9 Replay Calls. Call replays as appropriate. (See Appendix A.2.)
17.D.10 Line Calls. Assist with line calls upon appeal and when a line
judge signals a blocked view. (See Section 19.)
17.D.11 Appealed Calls. Rule on other calls appealed by players. The
referee may consult players and line judges to decide the
outcome of any appeal.
17.D.12 Line Judges. Monitor and manage line judge performance. (See
Rule 20.K.)
17.D.13 Hinders. Calls hinders and determines the validity of player-
called hinders. (See Rule 20.H.)
17.D.14 Damaged Balls. Determine whether a ball is broken or cracked
and must be replaced, and whether the broken or cracked ball
affected the outcome of a rally. (See Rule 20.F.)
17.D.15 Time-Outs. Enforce time-out procedures. (See Section 21.)
17.D.16 15-Second Warnings. Announce when there are 15 seconds
remaining in a time-out. At the end of the 15 seconds, the referee
40
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

must call “time in” and then the score when all players are ready
to play or should be ready to play.
17.D.17 Player Conduct. Monitor and manage player conduct. The
referee is empowered to call verbal warnings, technical
warnings, and technical fouls, and to forfeit games and matches
based on a defined combination of technical warnings and/or
technical fouls. The referee may also recommend ejection of a
player to the Tournament Director. (See Section 22.)
41
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 18 Player Pre-Match
18.A USA Pickleball Approved Paddle. Players must use an approved paddle
that complies with the paddle specifications in Rule 3.D. Players must
confirm that their paddle is approved and listed on the USA Pickleball
Approved Paddle List.
18.A.1 Non-Compliant Paddle Discovered Before Match Starts. Before
a match starts, when a player is discovered using a paddle that is
not listed on the USA Pickleball Approved Paddle List or is not in
compliance with the paddle specifications in Rule 3.D, the player
must switch to a compliant paddle. There is no penalty to switch
paddles.
18.A.2 Match Forfeit – Non-Compliant Paddle Discovered During Play.
During a match, when a player is discovered playing with a paddle
that is not listed on the USA Pickleball Approved Paddle List or is
not in compliance with the paddle specifications in Rule 3.D, a
match forfeit will be imposed on the player.
18.A.3 Non-Compliant Paddle Discovered After Match Concludes. After
a match has ended, when a player is discovered to have used a
paddle that is not listed on the USA Pickleball Approved Paddle List
or is not in compliance with the paddle specifications in Rule 3.D,
the match results stand.
18.B Apparel. Player apparel must comply with Rules 18.B.1 and 18.B.2.
18.B.1 Depictions. Graphics, insignias, pictures, and writing on apparel
must be in good taste.
18.B.2 Footwear. Shoes must have soles that do not mark or damage the
playing surface.
18.B.3 Apparel Change. A player must change apparel that is considered
inappropriate by the Tournament Director, including that which
approximates the color of the ball. A referee time-out will be used
for an apparel change required during a match. (See Rule 16.K.)
18.B.4 Match Forfeit – Refusal to Change Apparel. When a player refuses
to comply with the apparel rules, the Tournament Director may
impose a forfeit of the player’s match.
18.C Starting Server Identification (Doubles). Starting servers must wear the
required form of identification determined by the Tournament Director. This
identification must be visible to the officiating team and players during play.
42
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

18.C.1 Match Forfeit – Refusal to Wear Identification. When a player
refuses to wear the required form of identification, the
Tournament Director may impose a forfeit of the player’s match.
18.D Electronic Equipment. During competition play, players may not wear or
use headphones, earbuds, or any other equipment that enables audio
communication, except for prescribed or required hearing aids.
18.E Notice of Matches. It is the responsibility of each player to check the posted
schedules and notifications of schedule changes to determine the time and
place of each match.
18.F Reporting for Match. Players must report to play a match within 10 minutes
after the match is called. A match cannot begin until all players are present
and the starting score is called.
18.F.1 Game or Match Forfeit – No Show for First Game. When a player
fails to report to play within 10 minutes after the match has been
called to play, the referee will impose a game forfeit on the player,
unless the Tournament Director grants a delay of the match start
for extenuating circumstances. If the match format is one game,
the game forfeit will result in a match forfeit.
18.F.2 Match Forfeit – No Show for Multiple-Game Match. In a multiple-
game match, when a player fails to report to play within 15
minutes after the match has been called to play, the referee will
impose a match forfeit on the player, unless the Tournament
Director grants a delay of the match start for extenuating
circumstances. (See Rule 16.M.)
18.G Partner Change (Doubles). With the Tournament Director’s approval, a
player may change a partner before a first-round match when the change is
due to injury, illness, or circumstances beyond the control of the player. A
partner change after the partners start team play is prohibited.
43
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 19 Tournament Line Calls
19.A Match Officiating Options. Matches may be officiated by a referee with or
without line judges.
19.A.1 Referee Responsibilities: The referee is responsible for calling
service foot faults, short serves, and non-volley zone faults.
(Modifies 9.B.4, first sentence)
19.B Matches Without Line Judges. In matches officiated by a referee without
line judges, players are responsible for making “out” calls for the baseline,
sidelines, and center service line on their end of the court.
19.C Matches with Line Judges. In matches officiated by a referee with line
judges:
19.C.1 Line Judge Responsibilities. Line judges make line calls and
foot fault calls for their assigned line and assist the referee with
other calls as requested. Line judges will signify by loudly calling
“out” (or “service foot fault”) and showing the “out” signal
(outstretched arm pointing in the out- of-bounds direction).
19.C.2 Player Responsibilities. Players are responsible for making
“out” calls for only the service court centerline on their end of
the court.
19.C.3 Invalid Line Calls. Player line calls are not valid, except for their
centerline and to override an official’s line call to favor the
opponent.
19.D Appeals. Only rally-ending shots can be appealed. Any player may make
the appeal.
19.D.1 Appeal Timing. The appeal must be made before the ball is hit
to make the next serve. An appeal of a match-ending shot must
be made before the scoresheet is initialed.
19.D.2 Requesting Opponent’s Opinion Before Appeal. Before
appealing to the referee, a player may ask an opponent’s
opinion on any line call the player is responsible for making.
When the opponent is asked and the opponent makes a
definitive call, the opponent’s call stands unless the referee
overrules the opponent’s call on appeal or the player or their
partner overrides the call to favor the opponent (Rule 19.I).
44
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

19.D.3 Loss of Opportunity to Make Line Call. After appealing to the
referee or asking the opponent’s opinion on a line call, the
player and the player’s partner lose the opportunity to make the
line call, except to override the call to favor the opponent. (See
Rule 19.I.)
19.E Referee Makes Call – Without Line Judges. In a match without line
judges, when a player appeals a rally-ending shot to the referee, the
referee must make the call when they clearly saw where the ball landed.
19.F Referee Overrule of Line Call. Upon appeal, the referee may overrule any
line call by a player or a line judge. The referee must overrule the line call if
the referee saw the ball land “in.”
19.F.1 Fault – Referee Overrule of Player’s “Out” Call. When the
referee overrules an “out” call made by a player, it is a fault
against that singles player or doubles team.
19.F.2 Replay or Concession – Referee Overrule of Line Judge’s
“Out” Call. When the referee overrules a line judge’s “out” call
as “in,” the rally must be replayed, unless the singles player or
doubles team that benefits from the referee’s ruling concedes
the rally to their opponent.
19.G No Definitive Call by Referee. When the referee is unable to make a call
upon appeal, the outcome of the rally is determined by Rules 19.G.1
through 19.G.4.
19.G.1 No Call by Referee – Without Line Judges. When the referee is
unable to make a call upon appeal, the player’s call stands,
unless the player or the player’s partner asked the opponent and
the opponent made a definitive call, in which case the
opponent’s call stands. (See also Rule 19.D.2.)
19.G.2 No Call by Players and Referee – Without Line Judges. Upon
appeal, when the players and the referee are unable to make a
call, the ball is ruled “in.”
19.G.3 No Call by Referee – With Line Judges. When the referee is
unable to make a call upon appeal, the line judge’s call stands.
19.G.4 Replay – No Call by Officiating Team. When the line judges and
referees are unable to make a call, the rally must be replayed.
19.H Immediate Call by Referee. If a line judge shows the “blocked/blinded”
signal at any time, the referee must make the call immediately if they
clearly saw where the ball landed. If the referee cannot make the call on a
45
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

rally-ending shot, the referee must canvass other appropriate members of
the officiating team to assist in making the call.
19.I Player Override of Call. A player may override an official’s line call, their
partner’s line call, their own line call, or any “in” ruling when the override
favors the opponent.
19.I.1 Replay or Concession – Player Override of Official’s “Out”
Call. When a player disagrees with a line judge’s or a referee’s
“out” call that favored the player, the rally must be replayed,
unless the player concedes the rally to their opponent.
19.I.2 Player Override of Official’s “In” Ruling. When a player
disagrees with a line judge’s or a referee’s ruling of an “in” ball
that favored the player, the opponent wins the rally. (See also
Rule 8.G.)
46
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 20 Tournament Match Situations
20.A Confirmation of Score. Before the serve is hit, any player may ask the
referee for the correct score. (Modifies Rule 6.E)
20.B Confirmation of Correct Player or Position. Before the serve is hit, any
player may ask the referee to confirm the correct server, correct receiver,
and correct player positions. (Modifies Rule 5.C)
20.C Replay – Server or Position Correction. When the referee stops a rally to
identify a player or position error, the rally must be replayed.
20.D Player Repositioning. After the score is called, when the serving team
changes serving areas, the referee must stop play, allow all players to
reposition, and re-call the score to restart the 10-second count. (Modifies
Rule 6.D.2)
20.E Service Faults and Replays. Service faults or replays will be called in
accordance with Rule 20.E.1 or Rule 20.E.2.
20.E.1 Faults. In addition to the violations cited in Section 7, the
referee will call faults for service violations.
20.E.1.a Fault – Volley Serve, No Upward Service Motion.
When the server’s arm is not clearly moving in an
upward arc when the paddle contacts the ball, it is a
fault against the server.
20.E.1.b Fault – Volley Serve, Paddle Head Above Wrist.
When the highest point of the paddle head is clearly
above the server’s wrist joint when the paddle
contacts the ball, it is a fault against the server.
20.E.1.c Fault – Volley Serve, Ball Contacted Above Waist.
When the ball is clearly above the server’s waist
when the paddle contacts the ball, it is a fault against
the server.
20.E.1.d Fault – Volley Serve and Drop Serve, Release from
Hands and Paddle. When the server does not clearly
release the ball from only one hand or only from the
paddle immediately prior to the serve, it is a fault
against the server.
20.E.1.e Fault – Volley Serve and Drop Serve, Spin or
Manipulation on Release. When the server
47
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

manipulates or spins the ball immediately prior to
the serve, it is a fault against the server.
20.E.1.f Fault – Drop Serve, Force Added to Ball Release.
When the server propels the ball in any direction or
manner prior to hitting the ball to make a drop serve,
it is a fault against the server.
20.E.1.g Fault – Drop Serve, Ball Release Aided Height.
When the server does not clearly release the ball
from a natural (un-aided) height, it is a fault against
the server.
20.E.2 Replays. The referee has the authority to call for a replay when
they are not certain that one or more of the requirements of the
serve has been met. Replays must be called before the return of
serve.
20.E.2.a Replay – Ball Release Not Visible. When it is
questionable whether the release of the ball was not
visible to the referee and receiver, the referee may
call for a replay. When the referee is certain that the
release of the ball was not visible, the referee must
call for a replay.
20.E.2.b Replay – Questionable Release From One Hand,
Paddle or Natural Height. When it is questionable
whether the server released the ball from only one
hand or only from the paddle, or whether the release
on a drop serve was from a natural (un-aided) height,
the referee may call for a replay.
20.E.2.c Replay – Questionable Manipulation or Spin. When
it is questionable whether the server imparted
manipulation or spin during the release of the ball,
the referee may call for a replay. (Modifies Rule
7.B.2.a)
20.E.2.d Replay – Questionable Foot Contact with Serving
Area. When it is questionable whether either of the
server’s feet were in contact with the serving area
when the paddle contacted the ball, the referee may
call for a replay.
20.E.2.e Replay – Questionable Foot Contact Outside the
Serving Area. When it is questionable whether either
48
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

of the server’s feet were in contact with the playing
surface outside the serving area when the paddle
contacted the ball, the referee may call for a replay.
20.E.2.f Replay – Volley Serve, Questionable Upward
Service Motion. When it is questionable whether the
server’s arm was moving in an upward arc when the
paddle contacted the ball to make a volley serve, the
referee may call for a replay.
20.E.2.g Replay – Volley Serve, Questionable Paddle Head
Height. When it is questionable whether the highest
point of the paddle head was no higher than the
server’s wrist joint when the paddle contacted the
ball to make a volley serve, the referee may call for a
replay.
20.E.2.h Replay – Volley Serve, Questionable Ball Height.
When it is questionable whether the ball was no
higher than the server’s waist when the paddle
contacted the ball to make a volley serve, the referee
may call for a replay.
20.E.2.i Replay – Drop Serve, Questionable Force on Ball.
When it is questionable whether the ball was
propelled when the server released the ball to make
a drop serve, the referee must call for a replay.
20.F Damaged Ball. A player may appeal to the referee to determine whether a
ball is degraded, soft, broken, or cracked. A potentially soft or degraded
ball will not be replaced unless all players agree. If the referee determines
that the ball is broken or cracked, it will be replaced. (Modifies Rule 10.G)
20.F.1 Replay – Broken or Cracked Ball. When the referee determines
that the broken or cracked ball affected the outcome of the rally,
the rally must be replayed with a replacement ball. (Modifies
Rule 10.G.1)
20.G Coaching. Except during time-outs and between games, players or teams
must not receive coaching from anyone other than a partner.
20.G.1 Verbal Warning or Technical Warning – Illegal Coaching. The
referee may assess a verbal warning or technical warning against
a singles player or doubles team that receives coaching other
than during time-outs or between games.
49
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

20.H Hinder. The referee must validate a hinder called by a player. (Modifies
Rule 9.C.2)
20.H.1 Fault – Invalid Hinder. When the referee does not validate a
hinder called by a player, it is a fault against the player.
20.H.2 Replay – Valid Hinder. When the referee validates a hinder
called by a player, the rally must be replayed. (Modifies Rule
9.C.2)
20.I Distraction. The referee must determine when a player has distracted
their opponent from hitting the ball.
20.I.1 Fault – Distraction. When, in the judgement of the referee, a
player distracts an opponent when the opponent is about to hit
the ball, it is a fault against the player.
20.J Officiating Decision Challenge. Players may appeal any officiating
decision to the Head Referee or Tournament Director.
20.J.1 Rescinding Challenge Request. After a request for the Head
Referee or Tournament Director has been acknowledged by the
referee, the player may rescind the request; however, the player
or team will be charged a standard time-out. When a standard
time-out is not available, the referee will assess a technical foul
against the player or team.
20.J.2 Technical Warning or Technical Foul – Correct Ruling by
Referee. When the Head Referee or Tournament Director
concurs with a referee’s ruling, the referee will assess a technical
warning and charge a standard time-out against the singles
player or doubles team that challenged the ruling. When a
standard time-out is not available, the referee will assess a
technical foul against the player or team.
20.J.3 Referee’s Ruling Overturned. When the Head Referee or
Tournament Director does not concur with a referee’s ruling, the
referee must reverse the ruling to correct the situation or order a
replay of the rally, as appropriate.
20.K Removal of Line Judge. The referee may remove and replace a line judge
for any reasonable cause based on the referee's own observation or the
unanimous request of the players.
20.K.1 Player Request. When all players agree, they may petition the
referee to have a line judge removed.
50
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

20.K.2 Referee Disagreement. When the referee disagrees with the
players’ request to remove a line judge, the referee must
summon the Tournament Director for a final decision.
20.L Removal of Referee. When all players agree, they may petition the
Tournament Director to have a referee removed.
51
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 21 Time-Outs and Breaks
21.A Standard Time-Out. Two standard time-outs are allowed per singles
player or doubles team for each 11-point and 15-point game and three
time-outs for a 21-point game.
21.A.1 Before Start of Match. A standard time-out cannot be called
before a match starts.
21.A.2 Requesting Time-Out. Any player may call a time-out between
rallies before the next serve occurs or between games. The time-
out must be called audibly by voice or visibly by hand signal, or
both, and must be directed toward the opposing player or team
and to the referee.
21.A.2.a Fault – Late Time-Out Request. When a player calls
a time-out after the serve has been hit, it is a fault
against that player.
21.A.2.b Verbal Warning or Technical Warning – No Audible
or Visible Request. If the time-out call is not made
audibly by voice or visibly by hand, the referee may
assess a verbal warning or technical warning for
delay of game.
21.A.3 Between Games. Between games, players may request to use
one or both standard time-outs before the start of the next
game. The players must inform the referee. The standard time-
out will start immediately after the expiration of the time-out
between games. A time-out must be charged when any portion
of the time is used. When the requesting singles player or
doubles team is ready to resume play before a requested time-
out begins, that time-out is not charged.
21.A.4 After Medical Time-Out. A player may use available standard
time-outs after the expiration of a medical time-out.
21.A.5 Duration. A maximum of one minute is allowed for each
standard time-out.
21.A.6 Resuming Play. The referee will resume play by announcing a
15-second warning (Rule 17.D.16).
21.B End Change Time-Out. The referee will call a time-out to allow players to
change ends at specified points during single-game matches and tie-
52
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

breaker games. Players will not change ends during the tie-breaker game
when the first game of the match was forfeited due to late arrival.
21.B.1 11-Point Game. In a single game or tie-breaker game to 11
points, the players will change ends when the first singles player
or doubles team reaches a score of 6.
21.B.2 15-Point Game. In a single game or tie-breaker game to 15
points, the players will change ends when the first singles player
or doubles team reaches a score of 8.
21.B.3 21-Point Game. In a single game or tie-breaker game to 21
points, the players will change ends when the first singles player
or doubles team reaches a score of 11.
21.B.4 No Server Change. After an end change time-out, play
continues with the same server.
21.B.5 Duration. A maximum of one minute is allowed to change ends
during a game.
21.B.6 Loss of End Change Point. A technical foul resulting in the loss
of the end change point will have no effect on the completed
end change.
21.B.7 Failure to Change Ends. When an end change is not executed at
the required point score, the end change will be executed when
the failure to change ends is detected. It is not a fault on either
team, the score is not impacted, and service continues with the
same server.
21.B.8 Resuming Play. The referee will resume play by announcing a
15-second warning (Rule 17.D.16).
21.C Medical Time-Out. A player needing medical attention during a match,
including between games, may request a medical time-out.
21.C.1 Before Start of Match. A medical time-out cannot be called
before the start of a match.
21.C.2 Between Games. Between games, a player may request a
medical time-out, when available, before the start of the next
game.
21.C.3 Number Available. A player may be granted only one medical
time-out per match.
53
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

21.C.4 Rescinding Medical Time-Out Request. If the player rescinds
the medical time-out after the medical personnel have been
called and before they have arrived, a standard time-out will be
charged and the medical time-out will not be charged. When a
standard time-out is not available, the referee will assess a
technical foul against the player or team for delay of game.
21.C.5 Summoning Medical Assistance. The referee will immediately
summon on-site medical personnel to assess the situation and
render appropriate first aid. When medical personnel are not
available, the Tournament Director will be summoned for
assistance.
21.C.6 Duration. A maximum of 15 minutes is allowed for a medical
time-out. However, when medical treatment is rendered off-
court at another location at the venue, the time to transport the
player to and from the off-court location will be excluded from
15-minute time period.
21.C.7 Time Start. When medical assistance arrives, the referee will
start a 15-minute timer. Play must resume as soon as possible
but no later than 15 minutes of elapsed time.
21.C.8 Valid Medical Condition. When medical personnel, or the
Tournament Director, when medical personnel are not available,
determine that a valid medical condition exists, the player must
be able to resume play in 15 minutes or less. When the player is
able to resume play in fewer than 15 minutes, the remaining
medical time is lost and no longer available to the player during
the match.
21.C.9 Match Retirement. A match retirement is imposed when a
player is not able to continue play after the 15-minute medical
time-out period expires. A player may use their available
standard time-outs to allow more time before the match must
be retired (Rule 21.A.4). In doubles, if the retiring player's partner
decides to continue, the match will resume following all
applicable rules. The retiring player must leave the playing
surface.
21.C.10 Technical Warning or Technical Foul – Invalid Medical
Condition. When medical personnel, or the Tournament
Director when medical personnel are not available, determine
that no valid medical condition exists for granting a medical
timeout, the referee will assess a technical warning and charge
54
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

a standard time-out against the singles player or doubles team
that requested the medical time-out. When a standard time-
out is not available, the referee will assess a technical foul
against the player or team. The medical time-out is no longer
available to that player and the player must resume play
immediately.
21.C.11 Resuming Play. The referee will resume play by announcing a
15-second warning (Rule 17.D.16).
21.D Referee Time-Out. The referee may call a referee time-out to address
extenuating circumstances that require an extended interruption of play
and summon assistance, as necessary. When designated personnel are
not available, the Tournament Director will respond. Extenuating
circumstances include, but are not limited to, those cited in this section.
21.D.1 Referee Discretion. In the interest of overall safety, when the
referee determines a potential medical situation exists, the
referee is authorized to call a referee time-out and summon
medical personnel, or the Tournament Director when medical
personnel are not available.
21.D.2 Presence of Blood. When a player is actively bleeding or blood
is found on the court or a player, play must be stopped at the
end of the rally. Play must not resume until the blood has been
cleaned up and the bleeding has been controlled. Issues relating
solely to blood cleanup or control that do not require the
services of medical personnel will be addressed as a referee
time-out.
21.D.3 Foreign Substances. Foreign substances on the court, such as
debris, water, or other fluids, must be removed or cleaned up.
21.D.4 Resuming Play. The referee will resume play by announcing a
15-second warning (Rule 17.D.16).
21.E Equipment Time-Out. Players are expected to keep all apparel and
equipment in playable condition.
21.E.1 Time-Out Award. When the referee determines that an
equipment change or adjustment is necessary for fair and safe
continuation of the match, the referee may award an equipment
time-out of reasonable duration.
21.E.2 Resuming Play. The referee will resume play by announcing a
15-second warning (Rule 17.D.16).
55
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

21.F Time-Out Between Games. The referee will call a time-out between
games of a match.
21.F.1 Duration. A maximum of two minutes is allowed to change ends
between games.
21.F.2 End Change and Initial Service Change. Singles players or
doubles teams must change ends and initial service for the next
game of the match.
21.F.3 Change of Starting Server. Teams may change the starting
server between games and should notify the referee before the
start of the next game.
21.F.4 Resuming Play. The referee will resume play by announcing a
15-second warning (Rule 17.D.16).
21.G Time Between Matches. The allowed time between matches, including a
tie-breaker match to determine a championship, is 10 minutes. When all
players agree, a match may start early.
21.H Suspended Game. A game suspended due to extenuating circumstances
must resume with the same server, score, and remaining time-outs as when
the game was suspended.
56
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 22 Unsportsmanlike Conduct and
Related Penalties
22.A Referee Authorization. The referee is authorized to assess verbal
warnings and penalties to a singles player or doubles team any time
during a match while the players are in the vicinity of the court, including
before the match starts.
22.A.1 Timing of Assessment. Play will not be stopped to assess a
warning or foul. The assessment will be applied after the rally
has ended.
22.A.2 Player Misconduct After Match. Behavior rising to the level of a
warning or foul after the match is over while a player is still in
the vicinity of the court must be brought to the attention of the
Tournament Director. Based on this information, the
Tournament Director may impose a verbal warning, technical
warning, or technical foul that will be applied to the offending
player’s next match at the tournament.
22.B Verbal and Technical Warnings. The referee will assess a verbal warning
or technical warning for minor unsportsmanlike conduct. Only one verbal
warning may be assessed to each singles player or doubles team per
match. Warnings will be assessed for:
22.B.1 Objectionable Language. Using objectionable language
directed at another person.
22.B.2 Profanity. Using audible or visual profanity for any reason.
22.B.3 Aggressive Arguing. Arguing aggressively with the officiating
team, other players, or spectators in a manner that disrupts the
flow of play.
22.B.4 Ball Abuse. Intentionally damaging or aggressively hitting a
dead ball without endangering people.
22.B.5 Delay of Game. Delaying a game between rallies in a manner
that unnecessarily disrupts the flow of play.
22.B.6 Excessive Line Call Appeals. Repeatedly appealing line calls in
a manner that disrupts the flow of play.
22.B.7 Unauthorized Coaching. Receiving coaching from anyone other
than a partner, except during a time-out. See Rule 20.G.1.
57
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

22.B.8 Lost Ruling Challenge – Time-Out Charged. Challenging a
referee’s ruling that is subsequently upheld by the Head Referee
or Tournament Director. (A verbal warning is not applicable.)
A standard time-out is also charged. See Rule 20.J.2.
22.B.9 Invalid Medical Time-Out Request – Time-Out Charged.
Requesting a medical time-out when no valid medical condition
exists. (A verbal warning is not applicable.) A standard time-out
is also charged. See Rule 21.C.10.
22.B.10 Other Behavior. Other minor unsportsmanlike behavior.
22.C Verbal and Technical Warning Consequences. The assessment of a verbal
warning or technical warning will be accompanied by a brief explanation of
the reason.
22.C.1 No Loss of Rally or Point. Verbal warnings and technical
warnings do not result in a loss of rally or point adjustment.
22.C.2 No Effect on Server. A verbal warning or technical warning does
not result in a server change or side out.
22.D Technical Fouls. The referee will assess a technical foul for extreme
unsportsmanlike conduct:
22.D.1 Paddle Abuse. Aggressively or recklessly throwing a paddle in
frustration or anger with negligent disregard for the
consequences as long as the paddle does not strike a person or
damage property but puts a person or the facility at risk or in
danger.
22.D.2 Ball Abuse. Aggressively or recklessly throwing or hitting a dead
ball in frustration or anger with negligent disregard for the
consequences as long as the ball does not strike a person but
puts a person at risk or in danger.
22.D.3 Extreme Objectionable Language. Using extremely
objectionable language or profanity regardless of to whom or
what it is directed.
22.D.4 Threats. Making a threat or challenge of any nature toward or
against any person.
22.D.5 Lost Ruling Challenge – No Time-Out. Challenging a referee’s
ruling that is subsequently upheld by the Head Referee or
Tournament Director and a standard time-out is not available to
be charged. See Rule 20.J.2.
58
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

22.D.6 Invalid Medical Time-Out Request – No Time-Out. Requesting
a medical time-out when no valid medical condition exists and a
standard time-out is not available to be charged. See Rule
21.C.10.
22.D.7 Second Technical Warning. Being assessed a second technical
warning during a match.
22.D.8 Other Behavior. Other extreme unsportsmanlike behavior.
22.E Technical Foul Consequences. The assessment of a technical foul will be
accompanied by a brief explanation of the reason.
22.E.1 Score Adjustment. When a technical foul is assessed against a
singles player or doubles team, one point will be deducted from
the score of the offending player or team. When the offender’s
score is zero, one point will be added to the opponent’s score.
The player or team whose score is adjusted must move to their
correct position(s) based on their new score. A point adjustment
due to assessment of a technical foul that results in a game-
winning score applies regardless of who was serving during the
preceding rally.
22.E.2 No Effect on Server. A technical foul does not result in a server
change or side out.
22.F Game Forfeit. The referee will impose a game forfeit on a singles player or
doubles team for:
22.F.1 Technical Warning Plus Technical Foul. Being assessed any
combination of one technical warning and one technical foul (or
three technical warnings) during a match.
22.F.2 Late Reporting for First Game. (See Rule 18.F.1.)
22.G Game Forfeit Consequences. The assessment of a game forfeit will be
accompanied by a brief explanation of the reason.
22.G.1 Eligibility to Continue Match. A singles player or doubles team
against which a game forfeit is imposed continues play in any
subsequent games in the match.
22.G.2 Match Forfeit. For single-game matches, a game forfeit is
equivalent to a match forfeit.
22.H Scoring for Game Forfeit. When a game forfeit is imposed on a singles
player or doubles team, their score for the forfeited game must be
reported as zero (e.g., 11-0 for a game to 11 points, 15-0 for a game to 15
59
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

points, or 21-0 for a game to 21 points). Scores for games completed
before the forfeited game are retained. (See Rule 15.B.4.a for a round
robin.)
22.I Match Forfeit by Referee. The referee will impose a match forfeit on a
singles player or doubles team for:
22.I.1 Dangerous Paddle or Ball Abuse. Aggressively or recklessly
striking or throwing a ball or paddle in frustration or anger that
strikes an individual or damages facility property.
22.I.2 Starting Server Identification. See Rule 18.C.1.
22.I.3 Late Reporting for First Game. See Rule 18.F.1.
22.I.4 Late Reporting for Multiple-Game Match. See Rule 18.F.2.
22.I.5 Non-Compliant Paddle. See Rule 18.A.
22.I.6 Improper Contact. Making deliberately aggressive physical
contact with another person.
22.I.7 Multiple Penalties. Being assessed a second technical foul
during a match. Being assessed a technical warning or technical
foul after a game forfeit resulting from a combination of
technical warnings and/or technical fouls during a match.
22.J Match Forfeit by Tournament Director. Any time a player is at the
tournament venue, the Tournament Director may impose a forfeit of a
singles player’s or doubles team’s current or upcoming match, when
applicable, or an upcoming match for:
22.J.1 Venue Rules. Failure to comply with the tournament or host
facility’s rules.
22.J.2 Improper Conduct. Improper conduct between matches.
22.J.3 Abuse of Facilities. Abuse of hospitality or locker rooms.
22.J.4 Improper Apparel. See Rule 18.B.4.
22.J.5 Other Rules. Failure to comply with other tournament or facility
rules and procedures.
22.K Scoring for Match Forfeit. When a match forfeit is imposed on a singles
player or doubles team, all their game scores are reported as zero (e.g., 11-
0, 11-0 for a two-of-three games to 11 points format; 11-0, 11-0, 11-0 for a
three-of-five games to 11 points format; 15-0 for a 15-point game format;
and 21-0 for a 21-point game format). Scores for matches completed
60
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

before the forfeited match are retained. (See Rule 15.B.4.a for a round
robin.)
22.L Ejection or Expulsion. Any time a player is at the tournament venue, the
Tournament Director is authorized to eject a player from the tournament
or expel a player from the venue for:
22.L.1 Slurs. Using ethnic, religious, racial, or homophobic slurs.
22.L.2 Injurious Paddle or Ball Abuse. Damage to the venue or injury
to a player, official, or spectator through an act of paddle or ball
abuse or other acts of physical violence.
22.L.3 Biological Substances. Spitting or coughing on another person.
22.L.4 Lack of Effort. Not exhibiting “best effort.” This includes, but is
not limited to, defaulting, forfeiting, or not giving best efforts in
matches, whether for their own benefit or otherwise.
22.L.5 Other Behavior. Other flagrant, injurious, or egregious behavior
that the Tournament Director deems detrimental to the
tournament.
22.M Scoring for Ejection and Expulsion. When an ejection or expulsion is
imposed on a singles player or doubles team, all their game scores for the
current match and any upcoming matches in the bracket must be
reported as zero (e.g., 11-0, 11-0 for a two-of-three games to 11 points
format; 11-0, 11-0, 11-0 for a three-of-five games to 11 points format; 15-0
for a 15-point game format; and 21-0 for a 21-point game format). Scores
for matches completed before the ejection or expulsion are retained. (See
Rule 15.B.4.a for a round robin.)
61
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 23 Retirements and Withdrawals
23.A Retirement from Match. A singles player or doubles team may retire from
a match for any reason. The only option to discontinue playing a match
after the initial score has been called is retirement. Upon retirement, the
match is awarded to the opponent.
23.A.1 Retirement During Match. A singles player or doubles team
may retire before the end of any match being played by notifying
the referee.
23.A.2 Advance Notification of Retirement. A singles player or
doubles team may request a retirement in advance of any
upcoming match by notifying the Tournament Director, Head
Referee, or operations desk personnel.
23.A.3 Eligibility to Continue Play. A singles player or doubles team
that retires from a match may continue play in the same bracket
if eligible based on the event format.
23.A.4 Scoring for Retirement. When a singles player or doubles team
retires from a match, the scores for all games and matches
completed prior to retirement are retained. For a game in
progress, the actual score of the retiring singles player or
doubles team at the time of retirement must be recorded and
the opponent will be awarded the required number of points to
reflect a winning score for the game. Scores for games not
played in a match, when appropriate, must be reported as 11-0
for games to 11 points, 15-0 for games to 15 points, or 21-0 for
games to 21 points. (See Rule 15.B.4.a for a round robin.)
23.B Withdrawal from Bracket. Players may withdraw from a bracket by
notifying the Tournament Director, Head Referee, or operations desk
personnel.
23.B.1 Withdrawal Before Start of Bracket. A singles player or
doubles team may withdraw from a bracket that has not started
play.
23.B.2 Withdrawal from Upcoming Matches. A singles player or
doubles team may withdraw from all remaining matches in a
bracket prior to the initial score being called to start their next
match.
62
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

23.B.3 Ineligibility to Continue Play. A singles player or doubles team
that withdraws is removed from all upcoming matches in the
specified bracket.
23.B.4 Scoring for Withdrawal. When a singles player or doubles team
withdraws from a bracket, the scores for each game of each
match not played are reported as 0-0. Scores for matches
completed before the request for withdrawal are retained. (See
Rule 15.B.4.a for a round robin.)
63
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Section 24 Non-Officiated Tournament
Play
NOTE: In non-officiated tournament play, players administer their own matches
and report the results. All rules in Parts II and III apply to non-officiated tournament
play, except for those involving a referee or line judge, along with the modifications
set forth in this section.
24.A Change of Starting Server (Doubles). Teams may change the starting
server between games. They should notify the opponent before the start
of the next game. (Modifies Rule 21.F.3)
24.B Extra Ball. An extra ball carried by a player during a rally must not be
visible to the opponent and must remain in possession of the player.
24.B.1 Fault – Extra Ball Visible or Ball Falls. When an extra ball
carried by a player is visible to an opponent or falls to the
playing surface while the ball is live, it is a fault against the
player.
24.C Request for Referee or Tournament Director. Any player may request a
referee or the Tournament Director when:
24.C.1 Repeated Rule Violations. The player believes that the
opponent is repeatedly violating one or more rules.
24.C.2 Inability to Resolve Issue. A situation arises that players are not
able to resolve quickly and easily.
24.D Paddle Compliance Appeal. When any player believes a paddle is not
USA Pickleball approved or does not otherwise comply with all paddle
rules, the player may request that the Head Referee or Tournament
Director determine whether the paddle is approved.
24.E Use of Time-Outs Between Games. Players must notify the opponent of
their intent to use one or both standard time-outs before the start of the
next game. (Modifies Rule 21.A.3)
24.F Retirement During Match. A singles player or doubles team may retire
before the end of any match being played by notifying their opponent.
(Modifies Rule 23.A.1)
Section 25
64
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Part IV Rules for Inclusive Play
Part IV (Section 25) presents additional rules that apply to players who use a
wheelchair during play, standing players with permanent physical limitations that
affect their balance, mobility, or coordination, and players in hybrid doubles events
in tournaments. The rules that are not tournament-specific apply to all play, both
standard and tournament.
Section 25 Wheelchair, Adaptive Standing,
and Hybrid Doubles Play
25.A Wheelchair Play. Section 25.A applies to wheelchair players and events
that include one or more wheelchair players. Wheelchair players must
comply with Rules 25.A.1 through 25.A.12.
25.A.1 Player Eligibility. An eligible wheelchair player is any person,
with or without a disability, who plays the game in a wheelchair.
25.A.2 Doubles. Players in doubles who use a wheelchair may play with
a standing partner, an adaptive standing partner, or a partner
who uses a wheelchair, except as provided for in Rule 25.A.12 for
tournaments.
25.A.3 Power Wheelchairs. Players unable to propel a manual
wheelchair for the duration of an entire match are permitted to
utilize wheelchairs powered by electric motors. Power
wheelchairs must be controlled by the player only and cannot
exceed 10 miles-per-hour.
25.A.4 Part of Body. A player’s wheelchair is considered part of the
player’s body. The large rear wheels are treated like a standing
player’s legs for positioning.
25.A.5 Contact with Seat. A wheelchair player must have at least one
buttock in contact with the wheelchair seat when they strike the
ball.
25.A.5.a Fault – Failure to Contact Seat. When a wheelchair
player does not have at least one buttock in contact
with the wheelchair seat when they strike the ball, it
is a fault against the player.
65
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

25.A.6 No Ground Contact by Lower Extremities. Except as provided
for in Rule 25.A.7, a wheelchair player’s lower extremities, which
are the buttocks, hips, thighs, knees, calves, ankles, and feet,
must not contact the ground or any wheelchair wheel while the
ball is live, regardless of intent.
25.A.6.a Fault – Contact with Ground or Wheel. When a
wheelchair player’s lower extremity contacts the
ground or any wheelchair wheel while the ball is live,
it is a fault against the player.
25.A.7 Propelling Wheelchair with Foot. A player who is unable to
propel their wheelchair with one or both upper extremities
(arms) for the entire duration of a match is permitted to propel
the wheelchair using a single foot against the ground. The player
is then subject to the following restrictions for the entire
duration of the match:
1) The player must not utilize their upper extremities for
propulsion.
2) The player’s foot must not be in contact with the ground
when the player strikes the ball to make a shot.
3) The player’s lower extremities must not contact any
wheelchair wheel.
25.A.7.a Fault – Prohibited Actions. For a wheelchair player
who is allowed to use a single foot against the
ground for propulsion, when any upper extremity
contacts a wheelchair wheel, their foot is in contact
with the ground when they hit the ball, or any lower
extremity contacts any wheelchair wheel, it is a fault
against the player.
25.A.8 Serving. The moment the ball is served, both large rear wheels
must be on the playing surface behind the baseline and must not
touch anywhere outside the correct serving area. The front
(smaller) wheels are allowed to extend into the court when the
serve is hit.
25.A.8.a Fault – Wheel Not Grounded. If either or both large
rear wheels of a server’s wheelchair are off the
playing surface when the serve is hit, it is a fault
against the server. (Modifies Rule 7.A.1.a)
66
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

25.A.8.b Fault – Wheel Contacting Court. If a large rear
wheel of a server’s wheelchair is in contact with the
court when the serve is hit, it is a fault against the
server. (Modifies Rule 7.A.2.a)
25.A.8.c Fault – Wheel Outside Serving Area. If a large rear
wheel of a server’s wheelchair is in contact with the
playing surface outside the correct serving area
when the serve is hit, it is a fault against the server.
(Modifies Rule 7.A.3.a)
25.A.9 Two-Bounce Allowance. A wheelchair player may allow the ball
to bounce twice before returning the ball. The second bounce
can be anywhere on the playing surface. (Modifies Rule 10.B)
25.A.9.a Fault – Failure to Return Ball Before Third Bounce.
When a wheelchair player does not return a ball
before it bounces three times, it is a fault against the
player. (Modifies Rule 10.B.1)
25.A.10 Volleying. The front (smaller) wheels and the rear stabilizing
wheels may contact the non-volley zone at any time. (Modifies
Rule 11.A)
25.A.10.a Fault – Non-Volley Zone Contact While Volleying.
When a large rear wheel of the player’s wheelchair,
or anything that has contact with the volleying
player (including the player’s partner) contacts the
non-volley zone, it is a fault against the player.
(Modifies Rule 11.A.1)
25.A.10.b Fault – Non-Volley Zone Momentum. When a
volleying player’s momentum causes a large rear
wheel of the player’s wheelchair to contact
anything (including the player’s partner) that is in
contact with the non-volley zone, even after the
ball becomes dead, it is a fault against the
volleying player. (Modifies Rule 11.A.2)
25.A.10.c Fault – Failure to Exit the Non-Volley Zone
Before Volleying. After contacting the non-volley
zone, when a player volleys a ball before both large
rear wheels of the player’s wheelchair contact the
playing surface completely outside the non-volley
67
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

zone, it is a fault against the player. (Modifies Rule
11.A.3)
25.A.11 Playing Surface Dimensions. The recommended playing
surface area for wheelchair play is 44 feet (13.41 m) wide and
74 feet (22.55 m) long. The recommended playing surface area
for wheelchair play in a stadium court is 50 feet (15.24 m) wide
by 80 feet (24.38 m) long. (Modifies Rule 3.A.3)
25.A.12 Tournament Events. Wheelchair players may compete in any
tournament event, other than an adaptive standing-only
event, and may partner with or compete against either
standing players, adaptive standing players, or wheelchair
players. Only wheelchair players are allowed to play in
wheelchair-only events. In all cases, the specific rules
governing wheelchair players apply to any player who uses a
wheelchair, regardless of the event format or the classification
of their opponents or partners.
25.A.12.a Transition Between Standing and Sitting. When
playing in a non-wheelchair event, a player is
permitted to transition between rallies from being
a standing player to a wheelchair player, or from a
wheelchair player to a standing player, but only
once per match. The transition will be treated as an
equipment timeout.
25.A.12.b Replay – Questionable Wheel Contact with
Serving Area. When it is questionable whether
both wheels of the server’s wheelchair were in
contact with the serving area when the serve was
hit, the referee may call for a replay. (Modifies Rule
20.E.2.d)
25.A.12.c Replay – Questionable Wheel Contact Outside
the Serving Area. When it is questionable whether
a large rear wheel of the server’s wheelchair was in
contact with the playing surface outside the
serving area when the serve was hit, the referee
may call for a replay. (Modifies Rule 20.E.2.e)
25.B Adaptive Standing Play. Adaptive standing players must comply with
Rules 25.B.1 through 25.B.4.
68
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

25.B.1 Player Eligibility. Adaptive standing players must have a
permanent physical disability that significantly affects their
mobility, balance, or coordination, and not use a wheelchair
during play. Examples include, but are not limited to, players
with lower-limb amputation above the knee, limb difference,
cerebral palsy, stroke, neurological or orthopedic conditions
that affect movement coordination, severe balance limitations,
or spinal cord injury with ambulatory function, and players using
crutches or braces who cannot move quickly to the ball. Players
with below-knee amputations or minor impairments without
significant balance or mobility limitations are eligible as
adaptive standing players but are not eligible for the two-
bounce allowance option (see Rule 25.B.3.a.)
25.B.1.a Confirmation of Eligibility. Adaptive standing
player eligibility may be verified by self-assessment.
25.B.2 Assistive Devices. Players may use assistive devices such as
prosthetics, orthotics, braces, crutches, or canes during play.
25.B.2.a Part of Body. Assistive devices are considered part
of the player’s body.
25.B.2.b Prohibited Use. Assistive devices must not be used
to strike the ball or to intentionally alter its flight. If
an assistive device contacts a live ball, the ball
becomes dead and the rally ends.
25.B.2.c Dislodged Device. If an assistive device becomes
dislodged during a rally, the rally must continue to
completion.
25.B.2.d Fault – Non-Volley Zone Contact While Volleying.
When a player’s assistive device, or anything that has
contact with the volleying player (including the
player’s partner) contacts the non-volley zone, it is a
fault against the player. (Modifies Rule 11.A.1)
25.B.2.e Fault – Non-Volley Zone Momentum. When a
volleying player’s momentum causes the player’s
assistive device to contact anything (including the
player’s partner) that is in contact with the non-
volley zone, even after the ball becomes dead, it is a
fault against the volleying player. (Modifies Rule
11.A.2)
69
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

25.B.2.f Fault – Outside Serving Area. If a server’s assistive
device is in contact with the playing surface outside
the correct serving area when the serve is hit, it is a
fault against the server. (Modifies Rule 7.A.3.a)
25.B.3 Two-Bounce Allowance. Eligible adaptive standing players may
use the two-bounce allowance option in an adaptive standing or
hybrid event.
25.B.3.a Eligibility and Declaration. Players that may be
eligible for the two-bounce allowance option include
above-knee amputees, players with significant
mobility impairments, players with neurological
conditions (e.g. cerebral palsy, stroke) that
significantly affect their movement, balance, or
coordination, and players using crutches or braces
who cannot move quickly to the ball. If a player has
any doubt about their eligibility for the two-bounce
allowance option, the player must not use the two-
bounce allowance option. The two-bounce
allowance option must be declared prior to the start
of a match and must be used for the entire match.
25.B.3.b Second Bounce Location. The second bounce can
be anywhere on the playing surface. (Modifies Rule
10.B.)
25.B.3.c Fault – Failure to Return Ball Before Third Bounce.
When the player does not return a ball before it
bounces three times, it is a fault against the player.
(Modifies Rule 10.B.1.)
25.B.3.d Dead Ball. When the ball strikes a permanent object
(e.g., fence, wall) before the second bounce, it is a
dead ball and the rally ends.
25.B.3.e Player Identification Marker. At the Tournament
Director’s discretion, adaptive standing players using
the two-bounce allowance may be required to wear a
unique visible identification marker (e.g., a
wristband) during a match.
25.B.3.f Hybrid Events. Players not qualified for the two-
bounce allowance in an adaptive standing event are
70
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

not eligible for the two-bounce allowance in hybrid
events.
25.B.4 Tournament Events. Adaptive standing players may play in any
event that allows standing players with either standing players
or partners, or wheelchair players or partners. Only adaptive
standing players are allowed to play in adaptive standing-only
events. Adaptive standing players may play in hybrid events. In
all cases, the specific rules governing adaptive standing players
apply to any player who is eligible, regardless of the event
format or the classification of their opponents or partners.
25.C Hybrid Doubles Play. Hybrid doubles events must comply with Rules
25.C.1 through 25.C.3.
25.C.1 Tournament Event. Hybrid Doubles is a doubles event in which
each team consists of one wheelchair player and one standing
player, able-bodied or adaptive.
25.C.2 Tournament Bracket Designations. The Tournament Director
may designate hybrid brackets or include hybrid pairings in
standard divisions with appropriate accommodation.
25.C.3 Adaptive Standing Players. Eligible adaptive standing players
(per Rule 25.B.3.a) are the only standing players who may use
the two-bounce allowance in hybrid play and must declare this
accommodation before the match.
71
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Appendix A Faults and Replays
The following compilation of faults and replays is provided for
information purposes.
NOTE: The scenario descriptions are abbreviated. Refer to the
applicable rule for the complete parameters of the fault or replay.
A.1 Faults
Rule Scenario
SECTION 5 – PLAYER POSITIONS AND SERVING SEQUENCE
5.C.1.b Stopping play for incorrect claim of server or position
error
5.C.1.c Incorrect receiver when positions are correct
SECTION 6 – PLAYER READINESS AND CALLING THE SCORE
6.D.1 10-second violation
6.F.2 Challenge a correct score
6.F.3 Late score challenge
SECTION 7 – SERVING
7.A.1.a Server not grounded
7.A.2.a Server contacting the court
7.A.3.a Server contacting outside the serving area
7.C.5 Server makes an illegal volley serve
7.D.6 Server makes an illegal drop serve
7.E.1 Serve lands out of bounds
7.E.2 Serve lands in non-volley zone
7.E.3 Serve hits permanent object
7.E.4 Serve hits server or server’s partner
7.E.5 Serve hits receiver or receiver’s partner
SECTION 9 – DEAD BALLS, FAULTS, AND HINDERS
9.A.1 Stopping a rally
SECTION 10 – RALLY SITUATIONS
10.A.1 Receiver volleys the serve
72
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Rule Scenario
10.A.2 Server or partner volleys return of serve
10.B.1 Too many bounces before returning ball
10.C.1 Shot lands out of bounds and is called “out”
10.C.2 Shot lands on hitter’s court
10.C.3 Ball hits player
10.C.4 Ball hits permanent object before landing
10.C.5 Ball hits permanent object after landing
10.D.1 Ball double hit by player
10.D.2 Ball by partner and partner
SECTION 11 – NON-VOLLEY ZONE INFRACTIONS
11.A.1 Non-volley zone fault
11.A.2 Non-volley zone momentum fault
11.A.3 Push-off non-volley zone fault
SECTION 12 – THE PADDLE DURING PLAY
12.A.1 Using or carrying more than one paddle
12.B.1 Paddle not in possession when ball is hit
12.C.1 Catch or carry live ball
SECTION 13 – THE NET AND NET SUPPORT SYSTEM DURING PLAY
13.B.1 Serve contacting net support system
13.D.1 Ball hit between net and net post
13.E.1 Ball hit under net
13.F.1 Ball hit before ball crosses net plane
13.G.1 Player contacting net or net support system
13.H.1 Player contacting opponent or opponent’s end of the
court
13.I.1.a Player crossing net plane before hitting ball
13.I.1.b Player crossing net plane without hitting ball
13.I.2.a Ball crossing back over net to opponent’s side -
player crossing net plane before ball crosses net
plane
13.I.2.b Ball crossing back over net to opponent’s side – ball
bounces on opponent’s side before player hits ball
73
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Rule Scenario
SECTION 19 – TOURNAMENT LINE CALLS
19.F.1 Referee overrules player’s out call
SECTION 20 – TOURNAMENT MATCH SITUATIONS
20.E.1.a Service faults
through
20.E.1.g
20.H.1 Invalid hinder
20.I.1 Distraction
SECTION 21 – TIME-OUTS AND BREAKS
21.A.2.a Calling time-out after serve
21.A.2.b Failure to call time-out audibly or visibly
SECTION 24 – NON-OFFICIATED TOURNAMENT PLAY
24.B.1 Carrying extra ball that is visible to an opponent or
falls to playing surface
SECTION 25 – WHEELCHAIR, ADAPATIVE STANDING AND HYBRID DOUBLES
PLAY
25.A.5.a Failure to contact seat
25.A.6.a Contact with the ground or wheel
25.A.7.a Prohibited actions when allowed to use foot for
propulsion
25.A.8.a Wheelchair not grounded
25.A.8.b Wheel contacting the court
25.A.8.c Wheel contacting outside the serving area
25.A.9.a Wheelchair player too many bounces before
returning ball
25.A.10.a Non-volley zone fault
25.A.10.b Non-volley zone momentum fault
25.A.10.c Non-volley zone push-off fault
25.B.2.d Adaptive standing player non-volley zone fault
25.B.2.e Adaptive standing player non-volley zone
momentum fault
74
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Rule Scenario
25.B.2.f Adaptive standing player contact outside the serving
area
25.B.3.c Adaptive standing player too many bounces before
returning ball
75
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

A.2 Replays
Rule Scenario
SECTION 5 – PLAYER POSITIONS AND SERVING SEQUENCE
5.C.1.a Stopping play for correct claim of server or position
error
SECTION 6 – PLAYER READINESS AND SCORE CALLING
6.D.2 Player repositions after score call
6.F.1 Incorrect score call
SECTION 7 – SERVING
7.B.2.a Imparting manipulation or spin
7.B.3.a Ball release not visible
SECTION 9 – DEAD BALL
9.B.3.b Players disagree on a fault call
9.C.2 Valid hinder
SECTION 10 – RALLY SITUATIONS
10.G.1 Players agree broken or cracked ball affected rally
SECTION 13 – THE NET
13.A.1 Ball affected by net
13.B.2 Ball affected by net support system
SECTION 19 – TOURNAMENT LINE CALLS
19.F.2 Referee overrules line judge’s out call
19.G.4 All officials unable to make line call
19.I.1 Player overrides line judge’s out call
SECTION 20 – TOURNAMENT MATCH SITUATIONS
20.C Referee stops a rally related to player or position
20.E.2.a Referee uncertain whether serve requirements have
through been met
20.E.2.i
20.F.1 Referee determines broken or cracked ball affected
rally
20.H.2 Valid hinder
20.J.3 Tournament Director orders replay
76
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Rule Scenario
SECTION 25 – WHEELCHAIR, ADAPTIVE STANDING AND HYBRID DOUBLES
PLAY
25.A.12.b Questionable wheel contact with serving area
25.A.12.c Questionable wheel contact outside serving area
77
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Appendix B Rulebook Priorities and Guiding
Principles
Preface
The USA Pickleball Official Rulebook is the organization’s most important product.
It is the foundational document for the sport of pickleball and should be treated
with the respect accorded the sport’s founders and those who have written and
approved rules over the years.
Writing rules that are objective, clear, and concise is difficult work. Because those
involved in writing and/or approving rules come from diverse backgrounds and
experiences, it is important to have rule writing priorities and guiding principles
that help provide a measure of consistency from year to year. The following
Rulebook Priorities and Guiding Principles were developed to guide rule writers and
approvers in their important work.
Priorities
The following three priorities should be considered “tests” for any suggested rule
change. Any suggested rule change should satisfy at least one of these three
priorities, listed in order of importance:
1. The first priority is preserving the integrity of the sport, one that incorporates
the elements of fun, cooperation, courtesy, and competition. This priority pays
homage to those who developed the sport in 1965 and those who have written
and approved rule changes over the years.
2. The second priority is what is collectively best for the players. This priority
examines rule changes for improving the player’s experience. It “tests”
suggested rule changes from the standpoint of minimizing player
disagreements, making it easier to learn the sport, teach the sport, and play
the sport, while also allowing for moderate innovation as player skills and
equipment develop and evolve.
3. The third priority is what is best for officiating. It “tests” rule changes to make it
less likely conflicts will occur between players as well as between players and
officials.
Guiding Principles
The USA Pickleball Official Rulebook contains a wide variety of rules that cover the
court and equipment, recreational and social play as well as tournament play,
78
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

officiated and non-officiated. The following are Guiding Principles for those writing
and approving rules. To the extent possible, rules should:
1. Apply to all levels and categories of players: recreational and social players, as
well as professional and amateur tournament players (officiated and non-
officiated). Specific rules for a single category of player, for example, the pro
level player, should be approved after careful consideration and examination
of how the rule change might impact the sport beyond the pro level of
competition.
2. Be written with a deterministic focus, i.e., from the standpoint of “if this occurs,
this is what happens.” If something is not allowed or should not happen, the
consequences (for example: replay, fault, technical warning, etc.) should be
provided as part of the rule (e.g., replay, fault, technical warning, etc.).
3. Center on that which should not occur, not on what is permitted or allowed.
Attempts to include rules describing what is allowed will result in an
unnecessarily lengthy Rulebook.
4. Avoid ambiguity, player discretion, or referee judgment-related rules. Such
rules invite disagreements and different interpretations. To this end, when a
key word is used to describe when a rule applies, the word should be defined
as either a part of the rule or in the Definition section of the Rulebook.
5. Allow equipment manufacturers to innovate, as long as such innovation does
not overwhelm or outpace the average player’s ability to keep up with the
speed and difficulty of the sport. Equipment-related rule changes should be
given particularly close scrutiny because of their precedent-setting potential.
6. Have an element of precedent accorded to them. Change for change’s sake
should be avoided to avoid frustration among, or a loss of confidence by,
players.
7. Allow for an appropriate degree of player innovation. Such innovation should
maintain a healthy balance between historical rules that have been
instrumental to the sport’s growth and appeal.
8. Preserve the unique features and rules of the sport involving the Non-Volley
Zone and the two-bounce rule and prevent one shot, one paddle, or one type
of play from dominating the sport.
9. Address a known issue or anticipate trends and needs of the sport before
problems develop.
10. Be subjected to reviews and comments by domestic and international
stakeholders.
79
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

INDEX
10-second rule 6.D changes 16.K, 18.B.3
15-second warning compliance 18.B,
17.D.16 18.B.1, 18.B.2,
between games time- 18.B.3, 18.B.4, 22.J.4
out 21.F.4 Ball abuse
end change time-out Penalties 22.B.4,
21.B.8 22.D.2, 22.I.1, 22.L.2
equipment time-out Ball specifications 3.C
21.E.2 Ball, damaged (cracked,
medical time-out broken)
21.C.11 appeal 20.F
referee time-out 21.D.4 during rallies 10.G
standard time-out replay 10.G.1, 10.G.2,
21.A.6 20.F, 20.F.1
technical foul 21.C.11 Ball, in play 2
verbal or technical Ball, live 2
warning 22.C.2 Balls, dead 9
Adaptive standing play definition 2
25.B faults 9.A.1
assistive devices hinders 9.C
25.B.2 out calls 8.F.2
eligibility 25.B.1 stopping play 9.A,
tournament rules 9.A.1
25.B.3 timing 9.A.1, 9.B
event categories Blood 21.D.2
15.A Carry 2, 12.C
two-bounce allowance Catch 12.C
25.B.3 Coaching
Apparel definition 2
adjustment 10.I, 10.K penalty 20.G.1
80
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

when allowed 20.G Expulsion (See
Court Ejection)
definition 2 Faults (See Appendix
lines and areas 3.A.4 A.1)
specifications 3.A Forfeit
Definitions 2 definition 2
Distraction 10.F game forfeit by referee
definition 2 22.F
validity 20.I, 20.I.1 consequences 22.G,
Double or triple bounce 22.G.1, 22.G.2
10.B, 10.B.1 late reporting, multi-
Double hit game match 22.F.2
definition 2 multiple penalties
both partners 10.D.2 22.F.1
same player 10.D, scoring 22.H
10.D.1 match forfeit, referee
Ejection, Expulsion 22.L 22.I
biological substances improper physical
22.L.3 contact 22.I.6
paddle or ball abuse late reporting, single
22.L.2 game match 22.I.3
definitions, ejection 2, late reporting, multi-
expulsion 2 game match 22.I.4
lack of effort 22.L.4 non-compliant
other behavior 22.L.5 paddle 22.I.5
slurs 22.L.1 paddle or ball abuse
End change time-outs 22.I.1
21.B player conduct
Equipment, player 17.D.17
adjustments 10.K scoring 22.K
continue play 10.I
electronic 18.D Forfeits, match forfeits,
time-outs 21.E, 21.E.1 referee
81
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

starting server Injury, effect on play
identification 10.H
22.I.2 (See also Time-outs,
technical foul plus Medical)
second foul 22.I.7 Line calls 8
match forfeits, certainty, in vs. out 8.E
Tournament definition 2
Director 22.J disagreement
abuse of facilities (partner) 8.H
22.J.3 loss of opportunity,
improper apparel player 8.I, 19.D.3
22.J.4, 18.B.4 opponent’s opinion
improper conduct 8.I, 19.I
22.J.2 out call and signal 8.F
other rules 22.J.5 partner
scoring 22.K communication
venue rules 22.J.1 8.F.4
Hinder 9.C player override 8.G,
calls 9.C.1 19.F.2
definition 2 promptness 8.F.3
net or net support responsibilities 8.A
system malfunction spectators 8.J
13.J sportsmanship 1, 8.D,
referee responsibility 8.G, 8.I
17.C.2, 17.D.13 tournament, non-
validity 20.H, 20.H.1, officiated play 8
20.H.2 tournament, officiated
Hybrid Tournament 19
Play 25.C appeals, excessive
Adaptive standing 22.B.6
players 25.C.3 line judges 19.C
Bracket designations no line judges 19.B,
,25.C.2 19.E
Events 15.A, 25.C.1
82
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

no definitive call Not ready (See
19.G Readiness)
referee role 17.D.10, Non-volley zone 11
19.E, 19.F, 19.G, allowable contact 11.A
19.H definition 2
uncertainty 8.E dimensions Figure 3-1,
validity 8.F.1 3.A.4.c
Line judges faults 11.A, 11.A.1,
Blocked view 19.H 11.A.2, 11.A.3
player override 19.I, fault calls, non-
19.I.1, 19.I.2 officiated 9.B.3,
referee overrule 19.F, 9.B.4
19.F.1, 19.F.2 momentum 11.A.2
removal 20.K, 20.K.1, serves 7.E.2
20.K.2 wheelchair 25.A.10
responsibilities 19.C.1 Paddle 12
Momentum abuse 22.D.1, 22.I.1
definition 2 appeal 24.D
fault 11.A.2 allowable alterations
Net and net support 3.D.6, 3.D.7
system (See also Plane head, definition 2
of Net) 13 non-compliant 18.A,
ball, contacts 13.A, 18.A.1, 18.A.2, 18.A.3,
13.A.1 13.B, 13.B.1, 22.I.5
13.B.2 possession during play
ball around net post 12.B, 12.B.1
13.C specifications 3.D
ball between net and two hands 12.B
net post 13.D, 13.D.1 Permanent object
ball under 13.E, 13.E.1 dead ball 10.C.4, 10.C.5
player contacts definition 2
(touches) 13.G, Plane of net
13.G.1 ball crossing 13.F,
specifications 3.B 13.F.1
83
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

definition 2 serving and receiving
player crossing 13.I, positioning 5.B.2,
13.I.1, 13.I.2 5.B.3
Player conduct (See in serving area 7.A.3
also Sportsmanship) singles 5.A, 5.A.1
ejection or expulsion serving area reposition
22.L, 22.M 6.D.2
forfeit, game by Playing surface 2
referee 22.F, 22.G, 22.H Profanity
forfeit, match by definition 2
referee 22.I, 22.K technical foul
forfeit, match by (extreme objectional
Tournament Director 22.D.3
22.J, 22.K technical warning
misconduct 16.P 22.B.2
technical foul 22.D, verbal warning 22.B.2
22.E Readiness 6.A
Player conduct (cont’d) after time-outs 17.D.16
technical warning signals 6.A.1, 6.A.2
22.B, 22.C Receiver
referee management confirmation of 20.B,
17.D.17 20.C
verbal warning 22.B, contacted (touched)
22.C by ball 10.C.3
Player positions 5 correction by referee
after score adjustment 20.D
22.E.1 definition 2
after score call 20.D position 5.B.3, 5.B.4
confirmation 20.B, reposition after score
20.C call 6.D.2
doubles 5.B.3, 5.B.4 serve hits 7.E.5
partner 5.B.3, 5.B.4 Replays (See Appendix
A.2)
Reporting for a match
84
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

extension of time 16.M Selection of service and
late reporting 18.F.1, end 17.C.4
18.F.2 Serve
reporting time 18.F 10-second rule 6.D,
Resuming play 17.D.16 6.D.1, 6.D.2
Retirement 23.A ball release 7.B
advance notification definition 2
23.A.2 drop serve 7.D
definition 2 good serve 8.B, 13.B
during match 23.A.1 placement 7.E
medical time-out positions (See also
21.C.9 Player Positions) 5
scoring 23.A.4 singles 5.A
Score doubles 5.B
calling 6.B, 6.B.1, 6.B.2, positioning in serving
6.B.2.a, 17.D.2 area 7.A
challenging 6.E, 6.F, questions 5.C
6.F.1, 6.F.2, 6.F.3, replay 7.B.2.a, 7.B.3.a
6.F.4 (See also Appendix
confirmation request A.2)
6.E.1, 20.A two-bounce rule 1,
correction, replay 6.F.1 10.A
end change 21.B.1, volley serve 7.C
21.B.2, 21.B.3 Server (See also
incorrect 6.F.1 Starting Server)
points 4 Correct, doubles 5.B.1,
positions 5.A, 5.A.1, 5.B.4
5.B.2, 5.B.3 definition 2
technical foul, duration 5.B.5, 5.B.6
adjustments 22.E.1 first & second, doubles
tournament scoring 2, 5.B.2
15.C, 15.C.1, 15.C.2 position 5.B.3
winning game 4.B positioning 7.A
Service court 2
85
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Service motion 7.C, 7.D score adjustment
Serving area 2 22.E.1
Side out 2, 5.A.3, 5.B.6, two technical fouls
17.D.5 22.I.7
Sportsmanship 1, 8.D, two technical
8.G, 19.D.2, 19.D.3, warnings 22.D.7
19.F.2, 19.I, 22 (See Technical warning
also Player Conduct) behaviors that warrant
Starting server, 22.B
Doubles challenge of official
change of, non- ruling 20.J, 20.J.2
officiated 21.F.3, coaching 20.G.1
24.A consequences 22.C
correct position 5.B.3 definition 2
definition 2 invalid medical
identification 16.H, condition 21.C.10
17.C.5, 18.C, 22.I.2 player conduct 16.P,
Technical foul 17.D.17
behaviors that warrant plus technical foul
22.D 22.F, 22.F.1
challenge of official two technical
ruling 20.J, 20.J.2 warnings 22.D.7
consequences 22.E, Time allowances
22.E.1, 22.E.2 between games 21.F.1
definition 2 between matches 21.G
following end change between rallies 10.K
21.B.6 end change 21.B.5
invalid medical equipment time-out
condition 21.C.10 21.E, 21.E.1
player conduct 16.P, medical time-out
17.D.17 21.C.6
plus technical warning standard time-out
22.F, 22.F.1 21.A.5
86
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

reporting to a match between games
16.M, 18.F 21.A.3
Time-outs 21 duration 21.A.5
between games 21.F lost appeal of referee
end change 21.B, ruling 20.J.2
21.B.4 requesting, when
equipment 21.E, 21.E.1 21.A.2
medical 21.C resuming play 21.A.6
before start of a Tournament
match 21.C.1 Management
between games ball selection 16.G
21.C.2 draws and seeding
duration 21.C.6 16.D
number per match event categories
21.C.3 15.A
rescinding the gender restrictions
request 21.C.4 15.A.1, 15.A.2
resuming play event formats 15.B
21.C.11 double elimination
start of time 21.C.7 15.B.1
validity 21.C.8, non-pool play
21.C.10 15.B.6
referee 21.D pool play 15.B.5
discretionary 21.D.1 round robin 15.B.4
foreign substances single elimination
21.D.3 with consolation
presence of blood 15.B.2
21.D.2 single elimination
resuming play 21.D.4 without
resuming play 17.D.16 consolation
standard 21.A 15.B.3
before start of a team play 15.B.7
match 21.A.1 match scoring
options 15.C
87
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

scheduling matches partners 25.A.2
15.D playing surface
Tournament Director dimensions 25.A.11
responsibilities 16 power wheelchairs
two-match 25.A.3
minimum 15.F propelling with one
Two-bounce rule 1, 10.A foot 25.A.7
Verbal warning (See serving 25.A.8
also Profanity) 2, tournament rules
17.D.17, 22.B 25.A.12, 25.C
Volley 2 event categories
Wheelchair rules 25.A 15.A
bounces allowed Withdrawal 23.B
25.A.9 before start 23.B.1
contact with seat definition 2
25.A.5 from upcoming
eligibility 25.A.1 matches 23.B.2
lower extremity ineligibility to
contact 25.A.6 continue 23.B.3
non-volley zone scoring 23.B.4
contact 25.A.10
part of the body 25.A.4
88
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

Acknowledgments: USA Pickleball would like to thank
the teams that developed the new rulebook format, as well
as the 2025 Rules Committee, whose members collectively
contributed over 90 hours of volunteer time to this project.
We also want to acknowledge all the general members that
submitted new rules, rules modifications, comments on
rules, and voted during the rule change process.
USA Pickleball extends our sincere appreciation to the
committee of wheelchair and adaptive standing players
and the other advocates of adaptive pickleball whose
insight and dedication shaped these rules and revisions.
Their contributions were essential in making tournament
play more accessible, easier to understand, and welcoming
for all.
89
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

NOTES:
90
2026 USA Pickleball Official Rulebook © Copyright – All rights reserved

NATIONAL GOVERNING BODY
The Official Rules of pickleball is an essential resource for
players, referees, coaches, parents, and fans.
Included are USA Pickleball’s official playing rules and
interpretations, and detailed court diagrams.
This book is the singular source for the rules of the game.
USA Pickleball
All Rights Reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Please visit our website: usapickleball.org for the
most current rules and information
2010©; revised 2026©