[TOPIC: Pickleball - Wikipedia]
Pickleballis aracket sportin which two or four players use a smooth-faced paddle to hit a perforated, hollow plastic ball over a 34-inch-high (0.86 m) net, until one side is unable to return the ball or commits a rule infraction. Pickleball is played indoors and outdoors. It was invented in 1965 as a children's backyard game in the United States, onBainbridge IslandinWashington State. In 2022, pickleball was named the officialstate sportof Washington.[1]

Aspects of the sport resembletennisandtable tennisplayed on a doublesbadmintoncourt, but pickleball has specific scoring rules, paddles, balls and court lines. On each side of the net is a 7-foot area (2.1 m) known as thenon-volley zone(orkitchen); a player standing there may not strike the ball before it has bounced. The hard plastic pickleball produces less bounce than atennis ball. The limited bounce, non-volley zones, and underhand stroke, with which all serves must be made,  give the game a dynamic pace.[2]Slow soft shots in the non-volley zone, called dinks, are used to limit the opponent's ability to attack, while balls that are returned too high might be struck with a powerful drive or overhead smash shot.

After its introduction in 1965, pickleball became a popular sport in thePacific Northwestand gradually grew in popularity elsewhere. For four years in a row, 2021 through 2024, the sport was named the fastest-growing sport in the United States by the Sports and Fitness Industry Association.[3]By 2024, it was estimated there were 19.8 million participants in the United States, a 311% growth since 2021.[4]According to the Sports and Fitness Industry Association's 2026 report, 24.3 million Americans played pickleball in 2025, a 171% increase over three years. Of those, 7.48 million were core players, defined as those who played eight or more times that year.[5]

Two professional tours were established in the United States in 2019 and shortly thereafter two professional leagues were established. Pickleball is also growing in popularity outside the United States with two professional leagues and one professional tour operating inAustralia, and others being developed in Asia. More than 90% of professional pickleball players have a background in tennis.[6]

The game was created in 1965 onBainbridge Island, Washington, at the summer home ofJoel Pritchard, who later served in theUnited States Congressand asWashington's lieutenant governor.[7]Pritchard and two of his friends, Barney McCallum and Bill Bell, are credited with devising the game and establishing the rules.[8]

According to Joan Pritchard, Joel Pritchard's wife, "The name of the game became Pickle Ball after I said it reminded me of thepickle boatincrewwhere oarsmen were chosen from the leftovers of other boats."[9][10]Similarly, the game of pickleball was created from leftover equipment from several sports; abadmintoncourt,paddleballpaddles, awiffle balland a net height like that of tennis.[8]

Other sources state that the name "pickleball" was derived from the name of the Pritchards' family dog,Pickles.[11]The Pritchards stated that the dog came along after the game had already been named, and it was the dog that was named for the game of pickleball. They said the confusion arose when a reporter interviewing the Pritchards in the early 1970s decided it would be easier for readers to relate to the dog rather than a pickle boat. Representatives ofUSA Pickleballclaim that research on their part has confirmed that the dog Pickles was born after the game had already been named.[12]

Jennifer Lucore and Beverly Youngren, authors of the bookHistory of Pickleball: More than 50 Years of Fun!, say that they could not conclusively determine whether the game was named for the dog or the dog was named for the game.[13]They did, however, discover a third possibility: Bill Bell claimed that he had named the game because he enjoyed hitting the ball in a way that would put his opponent in a pickle.[13]

Shortly after inventing the game, some of its inventors and their friends brought pickleball to Hawaii, where the game became known aspukaball.Puka, meaning "hole" in Hawaiian, was at first used to refer to the ball, since pickleballs have numerous holes, and later used to refer to the game itself.[14]

When Pritchard and Bell returned fromgolfone Saturday afternoon in 1965, they found their families bored.[15]They had attempted to set upbadminton, but no one could find theshuttlecock. Pritchard and Bell challenged their kids to devise their own game. The adults and kids ended up at the badminton court and began experimenting with different balls and rackets, includingtable tennis paddles. The 5-foot (1.5-metre) badminton net was eventually lowered to hip level to accommodate driving the ball.[16]

Initially, aWiffle ballwas used, but later theCosom Fun Ballwas found to be more durable and provided a better playing experience.[17]The table tennis paddles were quickly replaced with larger, more durableplywoodpaddles fabricated in a nearby shed.[9][18][11]McCallum continued to experiment with various paddle designs in his father'sSeattlebasement workshop.[19]One paddle, he called the "M2", or McCallum 2, became the paddle of choice for most early players of the game.[20]Over the summer Pritchard, Bell and McCallum worked together to refine and document the rules.

In 1967, the first dedicated outdoor pickleball court was constructed at the residence of Pritchard's friend, Bob O'Brian.[12]Soon after its creation, pickleball became popular with local neighbors and relatives of the inventors. In February 1968, Pritchard, along with McCallum's son David and two other friends, formedPickle Ball, Inc.[21]to promote and sell the sport.[8]The company filed its firstannual reportin 1972,[8]around the same time they trademarked the namePickle-ball.[22]The company manufactured wooden paddles and pickleball kits to satisfy the demand for the sport.[18]Interest in pickleball continued to grow, and spread from the Pacific Northwest into warmer areas as "snowbirds" brought the sport south to Arizona, California, Hawaii, and Florida. In 2016, Pickle Ball, Inc. was purchased by PickleballCentral.com,[23]which operates under the corporate name Olla, LLC.

A 1976 tournament held at the Southcenter Athletic Club inTukwila, Washington, is credited with being the first formal pickleball tournament. It was billed as "The World's First Pickleball Championship" by Joel Pritchard and received a mention in the July 1976 edition ofTennismagazine.[24]

TheUnited States Amateur Pickleball Association(U.S.A.P.A.), now known as USA Pickleball or USAP, was formed in 1984. In the same year they published the first official rulebook for the sport, and held their first organized tournament, the National Doubles Championships, inTacoma, Washington.

In 2001, pickleball was included as ademonstration sportin the Arizona Senior Olympics (ASO) with 100 participants. The pickleball tournament was held at the Happy Trails RV Resort inSurprise, Arizona, and within five years included 275 participants. The inclusion of pickleball in the ASO was seen as a significant contributor to the growth of tournaments in the United States.[25]In 2008 the sport was included in the United StatesSenior Olympics.

USA Pickleball held its first regularUSA Pickleball National ChampionshipsinBuckeye, Arizona, November 2009. It has continued to hold the National Championships each year in various locations, except in 2020, when the games were cancelled due to theCOVID-19 pandemic.[26]Ironically, the COVID-19 pandemic was credited with driving more people to the sport as people looked for outdoor activities.[27]

TheU.S. Open Pickleball Championshipswas first held in 2016, and has been played each year since at the East Naples Community Park inNaples, Florida, which has 64 permanent courts.[28]The tournament isopento amateur, professional and international players. The 2024 event, which ran from April 13 to the 20th, had over 3,250 competitors, and over 50,000 spectators.[29]

Professional tournaments began in 2019 when two professional tours were formed independently. The Association of Pickleball Professionals (now the Association of Pickleball Players) was established and sanctioned by USA Pickleball. The Pickleball Professionals Association was also established, but did not seek sanctioning by the USAP.

The world's first dedicated pickleball stadium was established atThe Fortpickleball center, inFort Lauderdale, Florida, by Brad Tuckman and Rich Campillo.[30]The facility, located in the 93-acre (38 ha) Snyder Park, includes 43 pickleball courts, a 4,000-square-foot (370 m2) event center, a restaurant, and several other sporting and entertainment venues. It is also the permanent home and training facility for theAssociation of Pickleball Players.[31]

The Pickleball Hall of Fame was established by Seymore Rifkind in 2017.[32]In September 2021USA Pickleballestablished its own hall of fame named theUSA Pickleball Hall of Fame and Museum.[33]After significant pushback from the pickleball community, USA Pickleball reached an agreement to unify the two Hall of Fame organizations in April 2023.[32][34]

State SenatorJohn Lovickproposed a bill making pickleball the official sport of Washington state in 2021, and it was named the officialstate sportof Washington in 2022 by theWashington State Legislature. On March 28, 2022, the legislation was signed by GovernorJay Insleeon the original Pritchard family court where the sport was invented.[35][36]

Competitive college pickleball began in the United States in 2022 when DUPR, known for their pickleball player rating software, held their firstDUPR Collegiate National Championship.[37]That was followed by the formation of theNational Collegiate Pickleball Associationby Noah Suemnick in 2023.[38]Also in 2023 theAssociation of Pickleball Players(APP) announced it would also begin holding theAPP U.S. Collegiate Championships.[39]

In 2025 DUPR, in collaboration with the United Pickleball Association, rebranded the DUPR Collegiate National Championship as the Collegiate Pickleball Tour and National Championships. A Collegiate World Championship, where collegiate players from all countries will be invited to participate, will also be held.[40][41]‍

Pickleballtv(PBTV), an ad-supported pickleball streaming channel, was launched in November 2023. It is co-owned by theTennis Channeland theUnited Pickleball Association, the parent company of the PPA Tour and Major League Pickleball.[42][43]Pickleballtvis available through the Tennis Channel's app/website and pickleballtv.com's dedicated website, as well as several other streaming platforms such asPlex TV,FuboTV,Amazon Fire TVandRoku.

The 2023 report by the Sports and Fitness Industry Association (SFIA), released in February 2024, states that pickleball grew 223.5% over three years in the United States.[44][3]The report also states that 13.6 million people played pickleball in 2023.[3]In May 2024,CNBCnoted, citing a report from the Trust for Public Land, the number of outdoor pickleball courts in major cities went up 650% in the last seven years, with more than 3,000 courts across 100 of the most populated cities in the US.[45]

The 2022 SFIA report, released in 2023, estimated that approximately 900 million dollars of court infrastructure investment is needed to keep up with the fast growth of the sport. To illustrate the need for this infrastructure, the SFIA has reported that the Middle Atlantic region (includes NY, NJ, and PA) had the lowest court coverage with 1 dedicated court for 1000 participants.[3]Pickleball participation grew in every region in the United States according to the report by the SFIA. The South Atlantic region (includes DE, FL, GA, MD, NC, SC, and VA) had the most pickleball players with 1.9 million players. The Pacific region was second with 1.5 million players and the East North Central region came in third with 1.4 million players.[3]

When Major League Pickleball was established in 2021, offering league franchise opportunities, it attracted investors such as NBA playerLeBron James, retired NFL quarterbackDrew Brees, and entrepreneurGary Vaynerchuk. This increased visibility further raised the sport's popularity.[46][47]

TheApple Heart and Movement Study, a collaboration with Brigham and Women's Hospital, the American Heart Association, and Apple, found that amongApple Watchusers the number of pickleball players surpassed tennis for the first time in July 2023.[48]

An analysis by DUPR, whose software is used to set player ratings world-wide, found that the growth of pickleball is accelerating around the globe. While the United States still has the highest number of players, based on DUPR registrations, it is followed by Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, and Malaysia. Their data shows the top five countries with the fastest growing number of registered DUPR players are India, Thailand, Venezuela, China, and the Philippines. Players from new countries are frequently registering, reflecting pickleball's global spread.[49]

The growth of pickleball and other racket sports such aspadelwasn't received positively bytennisplayers, as clubs replace tennis and basketball courts with pickleball courts.[50][51][52]Novak Djokovicstated in a press conference during2024 Wimbledon Tennis Championshipsthat "on a club level, tennis is endangered" while also pointing out that a single tennis court can be converted unto multiple padel or pickleball courts.[53]

USA Pickleball published the original rulebook in 1984 while it was still operating as the United States Amateur Pickleball Association. Although not formally recognized by any international or national sports authority, USA Pickleball has continued to maintain the "Official Pickleball Rulebook" since it was first printed.[54]Each year the organization provides an updated version of the rulebook with corrections, clarifications and new rules it deems are necessary. In 2023 USAP began publishing a separate document that describes specifications related to equipment, such as nets, balls, and paddles. Equipment used in USAP sanctioned tournaments must appear on the USAP list of approved equipment.[55]

Rules-related information found in the sections below; Court and equipment, Order of Play, and Manner of Play, are based on the USA Pickleball2025 Official Rulebookor theEquipment Standards Manual, unless otherwise specified.

The regulation size of the court is 20 by 44 feet (6.1 by 13.4 m) for both doubles and singles, the same size as a doubles badminton court. A line seven feet (2.1 m) from the net is thenon-volley line. twenty-two feet (6.7 m) from the net, thebaselinemarks the outer boundary of the playing area. The area bounded by the non-volley line, the sidelines, and the net, including the lines, is known as the non-volley zone or "kitchen". The area between the non-volley line and the baseline is theservice court. A center line divides the service court into left and right sides.[56]Regulated tournaments and games are usually played on a specialized polyurethane sport surface; however, courts are often set up on concrete, Astroturf, and indoor basketball courts.[57][58]

The net is 36 inches (0.91 m) high on the ends, the point where the net crosses the sidelines, and 34 inches (0.86 m) high at the center. The net posts should be 22 feet (6.7 m) from the inside of one post to the inside of the other post.[59]

Balls must be made of a durable molded material with a smooth surface and must have between 26 and 40 evenly spaced circular holes. They must weigh between .78 and .935 ounces (22.1 and 26.5 g) and measure between 2.87 and 2.97 inches (73 and 75 mm) in diameter. Tournaments sanctioned by the USAP must choose from a list of preapproved balls found on the USAP website.[60]

Balls with smaller holes are generally used for outdoor play to minimize the effects of wind, but any sanctioned ball may be used for either indoor or outdoor play.[61]

The combined length and width of the paddle shall not exceed 24 inches (0.61 m); the length cannot exceed 17 inches (0.43 m).[62]There are no requirements regarding thickness or weight. The paddle must be made of a non-compressible material, and the surface of the paddle must be smooth. For USAP sanctioned games, paddles must be on the list of preapproved paddles found on the USAP website.

Modern paddles, such as those made by companies like JOOLA and Selkirk, use advanced materials like carbon fiber and polymer honeycomb cores to enhance control, power, and spin.[63]One common paddle material is T700 Raw Carbon Fiber, which is valued for its durability and ability to generate spin.[64]

Any fair way of determining who will serve first and from which side is acceptable.

The score must be announced before each serve. If a referee is officiating the game, the referee announces the score, otherwise the serving player announces the score.

In doubles: the score has three parts; the serving team's score, the receiving team's score, and theserver number, a "1" or "2", that indicates whether the server is the serving team's first or second server after a side out. The first serve of the game is always considered the serving team's second serve. The starting score in doubles is announced as "zero zero two (0 0 2)".[65][66][67]

In singles: The score has two parts; the serving player's score and the receiving player's score. The starting score in singles is always announced as "zero zero".

The first serve of the game is made from right side of the serving teams's court or the "even service"court.

A serve must land in the diagonally opposite service court on the opponent's side of the net (see "service in" diagram). The serve receiver must allow the ball to bounce once before returning the ball to the server's side of the net. Once the receiver has returned the ball over the net, the serving side must also allow the ball to bounce once before returning the ball to the non-serving side. This is known as thetwo-bounce rule[68]ordouble bounce rule.[69]

After the first two returns, either side mayvolleythe ball—that is, return it before it bounces. The ball can never bounce more than once before it is returned. No player may volley the ball while standing in thenon-volley zoneor touching any of the lines around the non-volley zone, or "kitchen".

A server continues to serve, alternating between the right and left service courts until their team commits a fault.

Doubles: At the beginning of a doubles game, the side serving first is allowed only one fault before their side is "out", called aside out, and the serve passes to their opponent. After the first side out of the game, each team is allowed two faults before a side out is called, allowing each of the players on a doubles team to serve before the serve passes to the other team. A team'ssecond servermust continue alternating between the right and left service courts from wherever their partner left off. For example, if their partner's last serve was from the right service court, the second server must start serving on the left service court. After a side out, the first serve is always initiated from theright serving area.

Singles: A side out is called each time the serving side commits a fault. If the serving player's score is even (including zero), they must serve from the right, oreven, service court; otherwise, they must serve from the left, orodd, service court. Depending on the current score, the first serve after a side out can be from either the right or left service court.

Pickleball is usually played to a score of 11. The winning team must win by two points or play continues until one team wins by two.[70]Tournament games may be played to 11, 15 or 21 points, with players rotating sides when either team reaches 6, 8 or 11 points, respectively.

Pickleball utilizesside out scoring, meaning only the serving side may score a point. The serving team earns one point each time the non-serving team commits a fault. Neither team earns a point when the serving team commits a fault. Since the score is always called as the serving side's score followed by the receiving side's score, the two scores are reversed whenever a side out occurs. For example, if the serving team faults when the score is "five three two" (two indicating the second server), a side out occurs, the other team becomes the new serving team, and the score is stated as "three five one".[71]

When serving, the server must be behind the baseline on one side of the center line and serve the ball to the opponent's diagonally opposite service court. Two types of serves are permitted, avolley serveor adrop serve.[72]

Besides the server, there are no rules dictating where each player must stand when the serve is initiated, but the serve receiver usually starts behind the baseline until they know where the serve will bounce. The receiver's partner usually starts near the non-volley line also known as the kitchen line. The server's partner usually stays behind the baseline with the server until they know where the first service return will bounce. Some doubles partners use a strategy calledstackingto ensure each partner can quickly move to the most advantageous side of the court, based on each partner's skill set, after each serve and/or service return.[77]

Serving from the wrong side of the court, the wrong player serving or the wrong player returning a serve should be avoided. Though not a fault since USA Pickleball changed the rule in 2024,[56]player positions should be corrected as soon as they are noticed. If noticed during a rally, the rally should be stopped and restarted. If noticed after the rally is finished, the rally stands.

Singles: In singles, a server's score will always be even (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10...) when serving from the right service court and odd (1, 3, 5, 7, 9...) when serving from the left service court.[59]: A-15

No player may volley a ball while standing in the non-volley zone or touching any of the lines around the non-volley zone. A player may enter the non-volley zone to play a ball that has bounced and may stay there to play other balls that bounce,[59]: A-22but the player must re-establish both feet outside the non-volley zone before playing a volley. The non-volley zone is the highlighted area and numbered lines shown in the "Service out" diagram. Unofficially, the non-volley zone is commonly referred to as "The Kitchen".[78]

After the serve, a rally continues until one side commits afaultresulting in adead ball.[79]Each team is responsible for making line calls on their side of the net. They may also ask an opponent for assistance; if the opponent saw the ball clearly and does then make a call, it is binding. If there is any doubt about whether the ball isoutorin, the call should be made in favor of the opponent.[80]

Pickleball player ratings are used to differentiate the skill levels of players. This allows tournament directors to group players of similar skills, thereby increasing the competitiveness ofbracketsand matches. The three most common methods for classifying a pickleball player's skill level are: self-rating, Dynamic Universal Pickleball Rating (DUPR), and UTR-Pickleball (UTR-P).[81]

A self-rating is determined when a player evaluates their own playing abilities against a table that describes progressively more difficult pickleball skills. The table of skills generally ranges from 1 to 6 in .5 increments. Self-ratings are often used by players who participate only in social play or non-sanctioned leagues and tournaments. Certified pickleball instructors may assist players in determining their self-rating score.[82][83][84]

DUPRwas developed by Steve Kuhn, owner and operator of the Dreamland family amusement center inAustin, Texas, and founder of Major league Pickleball. Originally called the Dreamland Universal Pickleball Rating, now the Dynamic Universal Pickleball Rating, DUPR scores range from 2 to 8 in .001 increments. DUPR includes a reliability rating that ranges from 1% to 100%. The reliability rating increases as more matches are played and recorded. A reliability rating over 60% is considered reliable.[85][86]

UTR-Pickleballwas developed by UTR Sports in collaboration with the Association of Pickleball Players. UTR Sports developed theUniversal Tennis Rating(UTR) which was modified for use in pickleball. UTR-P scores range from 1 to 10 in .001 increments. UTR-P assigns a preliminary score, for individuals with a limited number of games, as well as a verified and unverified score. Verified scores are determined when enough match results are entered by verified tournament and league officials. Unverified scores result when only results from recreational or other non-sanctioned matches are reported. Prior to April 2024 the APP and USA Pickleball used the USA Pickleball Tournament Player Rating (UTPR) system to calculate player scores for USAP sanctioned tournaments. UTR-P scores are generally about one point higher than the retired UTPR scores.[87][88]

The popularity of pickleball has spurred the growth of investors and sponsors. As a result, two pro pickleball tours were independently formed in 2019, theAssociation of Pickleball Players(APP), originally the Association of Pickleball Professionals, and theProfessional Pickleball Association(PPA). A professional pickleballleague,Major League Pickleball(MLP), was formed in 2021,[89]and a senior professional league, theNational Pickleball League of Champions Pros(NPL), was formed in 2022.

In 2023, the PPA and MLP merged under one umbrella organization, theUnited Pickleball Association(UPA).[90]

Major League Pickleball, in partnership with the Pacific Pickleball League (PPL) of Australia, announced an expansion to Australia in September 2023. The PPL was rebranded as MLP Australia and held its inaugural event September 2023.[91]

In April 2024, the United Pickleball Association, in cooperation with Global Sports of India, announced an expansion of the PPL and MLP to India. The intention was to start selling in time for the 2025/2026 season.[92]While this collaboration failed to materialize, in November 2024 the UPA announced the formation of the PPA Tour Asia and MLP Asia under the UPA Asia banner.[93]The PPA Tour Asia is expected to launch in 2025, and the MLP Asia is expected to launch in 2026.[94][95]

In July 2024 a new international professional pickleball organization was launched, the Pickleball World Rankings (PWR). The organization was founded by Pranav Kohli, in collaboration with the Times Group of India and Pickleball Asia.[96]Players will earn points to improve their PWR ranking by participating in PWR World Tour tournaments. Top point earners will participate in the PWR World Series.[97]Each event is expected to offer $500,000 to $1 million in prize money.[98]

As of June 2025[update]no pickleball organization has received recognition from theInternational Olympic Committee(IOC),[99]or any other international sports oversight body, as the official world-wide governing body for the sport of pickleball. However, there are several organizations vying to be the global governing body for the sport.

In 1984USA Pickleballbecame the de facto governing body for all pickleball because it was the first and only organization to step into the role when it was founded as the United States Amateur Pickleball Association. It also published the first official rule book that same year.[100]Recognizing the growth of pickleball outside of the United States, in 2010 USA Pickleball helped establish the International Federation of Pickleball (IFP), now theInternational Pickleball Federation(IPF), to serve as a world-wide governing body. USA Pickleball would continue as the national governing body for pickleball in the United States.[101]

In 2018 a second international governing body, the World Pickleball Federation (WPF) was established challenging the IPF.[89]In 2022, USA Pickleball, and several other member nations, withdrew from the IPF, and in 2023 they established a third international governing body, the Global Pickleball federation (GPF).[102]Also in 2023 a fourth organization, the Pickleball International Committee (PIC), was established claiming to be the global governing body for pickleball.

Meanwhile, professional pickleball continued to grow and attract more money. In 2024, after the PPA and MLP merged into the UPA, the UPA announced the launch of UPA of America (UPA-A), a competing governing body to USA Pickleball.[103][104]With the expansion of the UPA to Australia, India, and Canada, the UPA has become atransnationalorganization, resulting in the UPA-A becoming an international governing body through UPA events.[105]

In November 2024 the IPF and WPF announced that they had agreed to merge their two organizations, and in June 2025 the member nations voted to affirm the merger. The merged organization will operate under the Unified World Pickleball Federation (UWPF) name, and adopt the IPF's core mission of "No country left behind".[106][107]In February 2025, it was announced that the transition team was recommending that the newly merged entity be based inLausanne, Switzerland, home of the IOC.[108][109]

All of the organizations claiming to be the global governing body of pickleball are pursuing recognition by the International Olympic Committee and possible inclusion at the Olympics as ademonstration sport. A 2022 article bySports Illustratedconcluded the game would not likely be seen at the Olympics before 2032.[89]

Pickleball was accepted as a demonstration sport at the July2022 Maccabiah Games, considered the third largest sporting event in the world. This marked the first time pickleball appeared at an event sanctioned by the International Olympic Committee.[110]

The2023 African Games, also sanctioned by the International Olympic Committee, included Pickleball as a demonstration sport. The event was held March 11-15th at theUniversity of Ghanacampus inAccra. The Confederation of African Pickleball and the Global Pickleball Federation are exploring the possibility of holding a pickleball tournament at the2027 African Gamesin Egypt.[111]

Since 2003 pickleball has been played at theWorld Senior Games, held annually inSt. George, Utah.[112]Pickleball was first played at theNational Senior Games, in the United States, in 2013.[113]

Pickleball is expected to be included in the2027 Invictus Gamesthat are scheduled to be held inBirmingham, England.Carlisle-based Gaz Golightly, a military veteran and amputee, lobbied for inclusion of the sport after trying various wheelchair sports and deciding pickleball was by far the most inclusive for wheelchair users.[114]

USA Pickleball first included rules for mini-singles in the 2024 Official Rulebook. Mini-singles, sometimes called "skinny singles", follow basically the same rules as regular singles, except only half of each player's court is considered "in play" during each rally. The half of the court that is in play is determined by each player's score. If a player's score is zero or even, then the right side of their court is in play. If their score is odd, then the left side of their court is in play. The other half of their court, the half that is not in play, is out of bounds. A player incurs a fault if that player hits the ball onto the other player's side of the court that is not in play.[56]

An additional line should be drawn that extends the center line on both sides of the net through the non-volley zone. This line divides the non-volley zone in two, thereby establishing which side of the non-volley zone is in play, and which is out of bounds.[56]

Wheelchair pickleball, sometimes calledadaptive pickleballorpara pickleball,[115]was officially recognized as a competitive form of pickleball by USA Pickleball in 2016. The modified rules that pertain to wheelchair pickleball are incorporated throughout the Official Rulebook. Sanctioned tournaments may have separate divisions for wheelchair players, or they may allow standing players and wheelchair players to compete against each other. When a game involves both wheelchair and standing players, each player must abide by their respective rules. Standing players will adhere to the standing pickleball rules, and the wheelchair players will adhere to the wheelchair pickleball rules.

Wheelchair players follow the standard rules with only a few modifications. A player's wheelchair is considered part of the player's body, and all rules that apply to the body also apply to the player's wheelchair, except the smaller front wheels of the wheelchair are allowed to touch the non-volley zone line during a volley. A player in a wheelchair is allowed two bounces instead of one. When a player in a wheelchair is serving the ball, they must be in a stationary position. They are then allowed one push before striking the ball for service. When the player strikes the ball, neither of the rear wheels of the wheelchair are allowed to touch any baseline, sideline, center line, or extended center or sideline.[56]

APP Tour games are sanctioned by USA Pickleball and follow all rules established by USA Pickleball. The PPA Tour is not sanctioned and has chosen not to adopt some recent rule changes for professional and senior professional matches. Non-professional PPA Tour matches will continue to follow all rules in the USAP rulebook. The specific rules that the PPA deviates from for professional matches are: thedrop serve, the paddle swipe orchainsaw serve, andlet serves.[116]

The PPA has not instituted the drop serve and does not permit them in professional PPA matches. New USAP rules allow a player to touch the ball with only the hand releasing the ball, thereby making the chainsaw serve illegal in APP games. The PPA continues to permit the chainsaw serve in professional PPA matches. Let serves that hit the net but land in the correct service area are considered valid serves by USAP rules, but such serves must be replayed in PPA professional matches. If a second let serve occurs when the serve is replayed, it is a fault for PPA servers.[117]

Major League Pickleball uses a team format calledMLPlay, each team consisting of at least two men and two women.[118]A match between teams is determined by the best of four games: one game of men's doubles, one game of women's doubles and two games of mixed doubles. If tied after four games, adreambreakersingles game is played where after every four rallies the players on each team are rotated.

Doubles games use traditional side-out scoring, but dreambreaker games use rally scoring where the team that wins the rally scores a point regardless of who is serving. In rally scoring a team must score the game-winning point on their serve. If a team reachesgame point, their score will remain frozen until they win a rally on their serve, or until they lose their game-point advantage. The other team's score does not remain frozen. The other team can continue earning points when they win a rally on the other team's serve. Doubles games are played to 11, and dreambreaker games are played to 21.[119]

The rise of competitive play has also led to more injuries, according to recent analyses by the insurance industry which found treatment costs for pickleball injuries have increased as participation has grown.[120]Common pickleball injuries involve muscles, joints and tendons, especially in the shoulder, elbow and wrist (which proper technique, equipment, warm-up routines and injury prevention can help reduce). Advocates of the sport's growth say that pickleball is an activity that can provide exercise and social connections for players of all ages and skill levels, though fracture injuries associated with the sport reportedly experienced a 90-fold increase from 2002 to 2022, with a majority of injuries among players aged 60 to 69.[121]

When the hard pickleball paddle strikes the hard ball, it produces a sharp popping sound. The constant sound during play has generated conflict between pickleball court owners and nearby property owners.[122][123]The noise, combined with the rapid rise in pickleball's popularity, has produced an intense backlash against the sport in communities across the United States.[124]

In 2023, the American governing body of the sport,USA Pickleball, stated that “working together with manufacturers and the entire industry, we can develop quieter options that benefit everyone."[125]

In September 2020, one park in thePortland metropolitan areahad to institute a ban on pickleball, despite having just installed new pickleball courts five months earlier. Residents nearest to the pickleball courts said they could not hold conversations inside their homes due to the noise from the pickleball courts. Despite the ban, people still used the pickleball courts the following year. In June 2021, at aWest LinnCity Council meeting, one resident said the noise resulted in family gatherings being "... wrought with discord and physically debilitating stress." Some described the noise as "trauma-inducing".[126]Similar noise issues were raised in 2023 by residents of an apartment building adjacent to a pickleball court inHalifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.[127]

TYPTI is a sport that uses a strung racquet, a foam ball, with new scoring and rules. It plays on top of a pickleball court and is being played all over the country and around the world. It is near noiseless so it is becoming a tool to appease neighborhoods complaining about pickleball noise.[128][129]

There are several publishedGuinness World Recordsfor the sport of pickleball,[130]one of which is the longest pickleball volley rally, consisting of 10,532 consecutive shots, lasting 2 hours and 44 seconds set byAngelo and Ettore Rossettion October 10, 2022.[131]

InGhosts(American TV series), season 1, episod 18, "Farnsby & B", Sam and Jay play a pickleball game with their neighbors the Farnsbys, putting their house at stake.

---

[TOPIC: Pickleball Glossary]
20 by 44: A pickleballcourt. Pickleball courts measure 20 feet (6.1 m) by 44 feet (13 m).
Ace: Anyservethat is not returned by thereceiver,[1]or, more specifically, a serve that the receiver'spaddlenever touches.[2]The term, originally used intennis, has been attributed to AmericansportswriterAllison Danzig.
APP or APP Tour: SeeAssociation of Pickleball Players
Approach shot: A shot executed while moving from thebackcourttowards thenon-volley line.
Around-the-post (ATP): A legal shot that travels outside the net posts; its trajectory may be above or below the height of the net.[3]
Association of Pickleball Players: An American amateur andpro pickleball toursanctioned byUSA Pickleball.[4]Originally named theAssociation of Pickleball Professionals, when it was formed in 2019, the organization changed its name in 2023 to better reflect its support for both amateur and professional players.[5]
At the net: A player positioned at thenon-volley line; considered a strategically dominant position.[6]
Attackable ball or Attackable shot: A ball returned over the net in a way that allows the receiving side to make a strategic offensive shot. This can mean the ball was hit high and deep enough to allow their opponent to return a targeted aggressivevolleyfrom outside thenon-volley zone, or the ball has enough height after the bounce to permit a targeted aggressivegroundstroke.
Backcourt: The area of the court located near thebaseline.
Backhandshot: A shot made with the palm of the hand facing away from the net. For a right-handed player, a backhand shot would be made on their left side. The reverse can be said for a left-handed player. Contrast withForehand shot.
Backswing: The backward movement of thepaddlein advance of striking the ball.
Bagel: Ashutoutgameending when one team earned nopoints. In a standard pickleball game, an 11-0 endingscore.[7]
Bainbridge Cup: An international pickleball competition organized by theInternational Pickleball Federation, or the trophy awarded at the competition.
Bainbridge Island: An island in the state ofWashington, United States, where the sport of pickleball was invented at the home ofJoel Pritchard.
Ball! or Ball on!: A call made to alert all players when an errant ball is on the court, usually a ball from another court. For safety, all play should immediately stop and the serve started over once the court is clear.[8]
Ball type: Pickleballscome in two basic types, "indoor" or "outdoor", but some may be labeled "hybrid" with features that fall between the two. Rules permit any USAP approved ball to be used in indoor or outdoor matches.
Banger: A player that hits mostly powerfuldrive shots.[8]
Baselines: The lines parallel to the net at the back of the pickleball court 22 feet (6.7 m) from the net.[9]
Bash: A hard shot that hits the top of the net (i.e. the tape) and then lands in play on the opponent's side of the court. A bash is typically unintentional and very difficult to return as the ball changes speed and/or direction due to contact with the net.
Bert: In doubles, apoachshot where a player crosses in front of their partner to execute anerneon their partner's side of the court.[10]
Bevel: One of the eight sides of a standard eight-sided racket handle. SeeGrip (tennis)for how each bevel is referenced and numbered.
Block shot or Blocking: A backhanded defensive shot with little or nobackswingintended to slow the ball and drop it in the opponent’snon-volley zone; used in response to abody shot.[11]
Body shot, Body bag, or Tag: A shot that hits the body of an opposing player, often intentionally, thereby winning the point. Care should be taken to avoid the head, neck or face.[12](Also seeNasty Nelson.)
Bounce it!: In doubles, a call made by one partner to the other instructing them to allow the ball to bounce before striking the ball. Called when a player thinks the ball may land out of bounds.[13]
Carry: Hitting the ball in such a way that it does not bounce away from thepaddlebut tends to be carried along on the face of the paddle. This is a fault.
Centerline: The line bisecting theservice courtsthat extends from thenon-volley lineto thebaseline.[14]
Chainsaw serve: A serve that starts by swiping, brushing or rolling the ball against thepaddlebefore tossing the ball in preparation for striking the ball, thereby impartingspinon the ball, then striking the ball with atopspinstroke imparting even more spin. The serve was popularized byZane Navratiland is sometimes referred to as the Zane Navratil serve. As of 2022 the serve is no longer allowed per USAP rules, but still permitted in unsanctioned PPA pro games.[15][8]
Champion or Championship: The final winner in atournament bracket.
Chicken wing: An awkward defensive shot made with thepaddlearm bent and the elbow extended up and away from the body.[8][7]It also can refer to the shoulder and armpit area, on the paddle side of a player's body, that when targeted can force the player to make a chicken wing defensive shot.[1]
Chop, Chip, Cut, or Slice shot: Striking the ball using a slightlyopen facedpaddlewhile moving the paddle in a downward undercutting motion to impartbackspinon the ball.
Claw: When an opponent hits the ball with intense backspin that it hits the opposite side of the court, it bounces back to the opponent’s side. To keep the ball in play, the player must reach over the net to tap the ball. If the player doesn’t touch the ball, the opponents win that play. Most players will reach over the net and hit the ball forward potentially keeping the ball in play for the opponent to hit back. The best strategy is to reach over the net in a “claw” like manner and hit the ball INTO the net causing the ball to drop on the opponent’s side making it impossible for the opponents to play the point.
Closed face: Tilting thepaddleface down when striking the ball with the upper edge of the racket angled forward.[16][8](See alsoFlat faceandOpen face)
Coaching: Any communication to a player from a non-player. Coaching is not allowed while a game is in progress, except duringtime-outsand in-between games.[17]
Coed pickleball: Pickleball competitions where men and women compete without any distinctions related to sex.
Continental grip or Hammer grip: Grasping thepaddlehandle so that the index finger and thumb form a "V" in line with the edge of the paddle; similar to picking up a hammer.[18][19](See alsoGrip)
Cough Drop: A shot where the ball hits the top of the net and falls back on the player’s side that hit the ball. Opposite term is lemon drop.
Crosscourt: The opponent's half of the court that is diagonally opposite the player striking the ball.
Dead ball: A ball that is no longer in play, or any action that stops play.[20]A dead ball occurs whenever one of the following occur; afaultis committed, the ball strikes apermanent object, or ahindranceis called.[21]
Dink or Dink shot: A soft return shot made at, in, or near thenon-volley zone, after the ball has bounced, that just clears the net and drops into the opponent'snon-volley zone.[22]
Dink rally: A series of slowdinkshots where each side attempts to deny their opponent anattackable ball.
Dink volley: A soft return shot made at or near thenon-volley line, prior to the ball bouncing, that just clears the net and drops into the opponent'snon-volley zone.
Dinker: A pickleball player that is exceptionally good at dinking.[1]
Double hit: Hitting the ball twice with thepaddlebefore the ball is returned. A valid play as long as the hits are both performed as part of one continuous stroke.[23]Double hit might also refer to hitting the ball twice, involving one player or both players on a team, but using two separate strokes. This is a fault.[24]
Doubles: Pickleball matches having two players per side. (Contrast toSingles)
DreamBreaker or Dillbreaker: A tie-breaking singlesgameused inMLP team formatcompetitions. If two teams remain tied after four games ofdoubles, a dreambreakersinglesgame is played to decide the match. After every four rallies, the individuals playing on both teams are rotated.
Drive shot: A powerfulgroundstrokeorvolleyhit fast and low over the net to the opponent'sbackcourt.[8][25]
Drop or Drop shot: A soft return shot made from theback courtormid court, after the ball has bounced, that lands in or near the opponent'snon-volley zone.
Drop volley: A soft return shot made from theback courtormid court, prior to the ball bouncing, that lands in or near the opponent'snon-volley zone.
DUPR orDynamic Universal Pickleball Rating: A pickleball player rating system ranging from 2.0 to 8.0. Developed bySteve Kuhnat his Dreamland family amusement center inAustin, Texas. DUPR was originally called the Dreamland Universal Pickleball Rating.
Eastern grip or Handshake grip: Grasping thepaddlehandle so that the index finger and thumb form a "V" in line with the second bevel on the paddle handle; an angle similar to shaking hands with someone.[19](See alsoGrip)
Erne: Avolleyhit near the net by a player positioned outside the court or in the process of leaping outside the court. A legally executed erne shot allows a player to hit the ball closer to the net without stepping in thenon-volley zone. Named forErne Perry, the first person credited with using the shot in mainstream competitive play.[26]
Every. Pickle. Point. Counts.: A scoring system used in some team format pickleball tournaments where points won in each game are cumulative, with additional points added based on games won.[27]
Fault: An infringement of the rules that ends arallyand results in adead ball.[28]
First server, First serve: In doubles; the first team member to serve the ball after aside–out. If a side-out occurs when the team's score is even, the team'sstarting serverwill be thefirst server, otherwise the non-starting server will be the first server. (See alsoStarting server)
Flat face: Keeping thepaddleface parallel with the plane of the net when striking the ball without angling the racket up or down.[29][8](See alsoClosed faceandOpen face)
Foot fault: A foot fault can occur when serving or when volleying.
Forehandshot: A shot made with the palm of the hand facing towards the net. For a right-handed player, a forehand shot would be made on their right side. The reverse can be said for a left-handed player. Contrast withBackhand shot.
Game: A series ofrallieswhere each side tries to earn points and reach the predetermined game-winning number of points first. Official rules set the game-winning number of points at 11, but tournament directors sometimes set that game-winning number of points at 15, 21, or higher. Unless otherwise specified by the tournament director, a player, or team, must win a game by two points, therefore, even if the predetermined game-winning number of points is set at 11, the final winning total could climb indefinitely higher, if the twosidesalternate winning points but stay within one point of each other.
Game point: A juncture during a game when a player, or team, only needs to win the nextrallyto win the game, i. e. the game-winning point. If a game point win would also determine thematch, orchampionship, it may be referred to as amatch pointorchampionship point. If the game-winning point would end the game with the other side having zero points, it may be referred to as apickle point.
Groundstrokeor Ground stroke: A ball that is struck after it bounces.[33]
Half Volley: A ground stroke that is struck low to the ground immediately after the ball bounces.[34]
Hand signal(s): A non-verbal physical hand gesture used to communicate during thegame. Hand signals might be used byline judgesor players.[35][36]Common hand signals include:
Handle: The part of the racket that is used to grip thepaddle.
Hinder or Hindrance: An interference of play by something outside of thegame, such as an errant ball or a person crossing the court. Hinders result in adead ball, and thepointis replayed. Adead balloccurs as soon as a hinder is called by either side. If it is subsequently determined that the hinder call was invalid, then the point is not replayed, and the side calling the hinder loses the point.[37]
I-formation: Indoubles; a player positioning strategy used by the serving team, where the non-serving player starts at thenon-volley line. The intent is to confuse the receiving team while allowing the serving side to preposition one player at the net, putting pressure on the receiving side to make a quality fourth shot. The strategy can be risky and requires the non-serving player to stay low and out of the ball's flight pattern. The serving team must wait for the return ball to bounce, which means the server must cover the entire width of the court on thethird shot, if their partner is already up at the non-volley line. The non-serving partner can be intentionally targeted by the receiving side forcing afaultfor the serving side.[38]
IFP: SeeInternational Pickleball Federation.
In: Aline callmade when a ball lands within or on the court lines, or in the case of a serve, within theservice court.[39]Sometimes indicated with ahand signalby using a flat palm facing down or pointing the index finger down.
Incorrect position: When the ball is served from the wrong serving area. As of 2024 this is no longer a fault.
Incorrect receiver: In doubles; when the wrong receiving team member returns the serve. As of 2024 this is no longer a fault.
Incorrect server: In doubles; when the wrong serving team member serves the ball. As of 2024 this is no longer a fault.
International Federation of Pickleball (IFP): SeeInternational Pickleball Federation.
International Pickleball Federation(IPF): A federation of national pickleball organizations. Established in 2010 to serve as the world governing body for the sport of pickleball. Originally named the International Federation of Pickleball (IFP).
Into-the-post or ITP: A shot that results in the ball hitting the post, usually occurring when attempting anAround-the-postshot.
IPF: SeeInternational Pickleball Federation.
Joey: Hitting anATPshot directly back at the opponent that made the ATP shot. Named forJoe Valenti.[40]
King of the Court or Queen of the Court: A pickleball competition format, either doubles or singles, where one side is designated the "king of the court" or "queen of the court", and the other side is designated the "challenger". A series of rotating challengers play a set number of points against the king. If the challenger wins, the challenger becomes the new king of the court, and the previous king moves to the back of the challenger line. Variations of the competition format may involve multiple courts where one court is designated the king's court and one the jester's court, with any number of courts in between. Winners of each game move up in ranking towards the king's court, losers of each game move down in ranking towards the jester's court.
Lemon drop: A shot where the ball hits the top of the net and dribbles down on the opponent’s side.
Let serve: When a served ball hits the net, but still lands in the correctservice court. A valid serve in USAP rules.
Line call: The determination whether a ball has landed inside or outside the court lines, or in the case of the serve, inside or outside theservice court. Players are responsible for making good-faith line calls on their side of the net. When there is any uncertainty, or if the two players on adoublesteam make different calls, the call should be made in favor of their opponent. The point where the ball contacts the ground determines whether a ball is in or out. Although the sphere of the ball might overlap the line when viewed from above, due to the rigidity of the ball the contact point might remain outside the lines, however, an out call should not be made unless space can be clearly seen between the line and the contact point.[39][41]In refereed matches, an appeal to overrule the call may be made to the referee, but referees will only overrule the out call if they were able to clearly see the ball was in.
Lob shot: Hitting the ball in a high arc over the opponent's head with the objective of landing the ball in the opponent'sbackcourt. (See alsoLob (tennis))
Major League Pickleball or MLP: An American professional pickleballsports leagueandpro pickleball tourthat uses theMLP team formatfor eachtournament. The MLP's parent corporation is theUPA.
Major League Pickleball Australia or MLPA: An Australian professional pickleballsports leagueandpro pickleball tourthat uses theMLP team formatfor eachtournament. The MLPA's parent corporation is theUPA. Formerly the Pacific Pickleball League (PPL).
Match: A set ofgamesthat determines which player, or team, will advance within abracket level, or who will win the tournamentchampionship. Usually an odd number of games, such as 1, 3 or 5, are played. The player, or team, that wins the most games advances.
Midcourt: The area of the court between thenon-volley zoneandbackcourtincluding thetransition zone.[8]
Mini-singles: A version of singles pickleball where only half of each player's court is used during each rally.
Misdirection: A strategy where a player intentionally deceives their opponent by preparing to hit the ball in a certain direction, or with a certainpace, but at the last second hitting the ball in an unexpected direction or with an unexpected pace.[8]
MLP or MLP Tour: SeeMajor League Pickleball
MLPA or MLPA Tour: SeeMajor League Pickleball Australia
MLPlay: theteam formatused byMajor League Pickleball.
Momentum: In physics, momentum is the tendency of a body in motion to continue its motion and direction. If a player's momentum causes that player to step in or touch thenon-volley zone, after volleying the ball, that player incurs a fault. All actions that took place after the offending playervolleyedthe ball are void, regardless of whether the other side continued to play thepoint, and regardless of how many time the ball passed over the net after the offending player first volleyed the ball.[42]Momentum may also refer to the tendency to expect a side that has won multiple consecutive points, to continue winning additional points.
Nasty Nelson: Abody shotmade during the serve intentionally hitting the non-receiving opposing player closest to the net, rewarding the point to the server. Named forTimothy Nelson.[43]Such a shot is always afaultfor  the receiving side of the net, and a point for the serving side, because the non-receiving player is not allowed to interfere with the serve in any way.
National Pickleball League or NPL: May refer to one of the following:
Non-volley line or Kitchen line: Court lines on each side of the net that are parallel to the net, and 7 feet (2.1 m) from the net, that run from onesidelineto the other.[46]Thenon-volley line, and thesidleneson either side of the NVZ, are part of thenon-volley zone.
Non-volley zone, NVZ or Kitchen: A 7 feet (2.1 m) by 20 feet (6.1 m) area adjacent to the net within which one may notvolleythe ball. The non-volley zone includes all lines around it.[47]Also called the "kitchen".[48]A player may step or stand within the non-volley zone at any time, but must reestablish both feet outside the non-volley zone prior to volleying the ball. If a player's momentum causes the player to touch any part of the non-volley zone after volleying the ball, it results in adead balland that player incurs a fault, regardless of whether the other team continued to play or not.[49]
NPL: See SeeNational Pickleball League.
Open face: Tilting thepaddleface up when striking the ball with the lower edge of the racket angled forward.[50][8](See alsoClosed faceandFlat face)
Out: Aline callmade when a ball lands outside the court lines, or in the case of a serve, outside theservice court.[39]Sometimes indicated with a hand signal by pointing the index finger up, or sideways in the direction the ball was out.
Out!: An exclamation made by a player which may be interpreted in one of two ways:
Overgripor Overwrap: A thin secondary clothlike padded binding used to cover the primary grip that is on thehandleof thepaddle. Overgrips may provide additional girth, stickiness, sweat absorption or cosmetic appeal, and are generally less expensive and more easily replaceable than the primary grip covering.[32]
Pace: The speed and power imparted to the ball when it is struck by thepaddle.[1]Pace can be used strategically to control the tempo or rhythm of thegameand to put the opponent on the defensive. The ability to alter pace can leave the opponent uncertain about what to expect from each shot.[51]

---

[TOPIC: Dink (pickleball)]
Adrop shotis a shot in someracket sportsin which the ball (or birdie) is hit relatively softly, sometimes withtopspinorbackspin, so that it lands just over and close to the net. A well-placed and well-timed drop shot will make it difficult for the opposing player to hit an aggressive or offensive shot in return. The most successful drop shots will not allow the opponent to hit the ball back at all.[1][2][3][4][5]

A good drop shot requires great touch.[6]The ball should bounce low and near the net, sometimes withunderspin(orbackspin).  Backspin slows the ball and decreases the height of its bounce. In some extreme cases, the ball will bounce back towards the net.  Sidespin may also be put on the ball so it kicks sideways when it bounces. A bad drop shot is one that travels too deep into the court, or bounces too high. When this happens, the opponent can get to the ball, and make an easy play. A very soft drop shot, that just barely travels over the net, is sometimes called a dink (a term possibly borrowed from volleyball).[7]

Making the drop shot a surprise also makes it more effective. If opponents are expecting a normal shot, they may not be in position to run forward to make a good play on a drop shot.[8]

The characteristics of somecourt surfacesmake drop shots particularly effective; grass and clay are good examples.[9]On grass, the ball tends to bounce lower than other courts, which makes it harder to retrieve a drop shot.  On clay, the slow surface tends to encourage players to stay far back and engage in rallies from behind the baseline, which in turn increases the distance the player must cover to reach a drop shot near the net. Drop shots on hard courts can be useful, although to a lesser degree.  Drop shots are also useful when the wind is blowing in the opposite direction of the shot; this allows spin without hitting the shot too long.[10]

A drop shot hit with avolleyis aptly coined adrop volley. The secret to making a good drop volley is having "soft hands." To achieve this, a player slightly loosens his or her grip on the racquet at the moment of impact with the ball. This allows the racquet to absorb more force and reduces the ball's rebound. This stroke was mastered by one of the greatest serve and volleyers of all time,John McEnroe.

In the sport ofpickleballadrop shotis a soft shot with a high arc, made from the back of the court after the ball has bounced, that lands the ball in, or near, the opponent'snon-volley zone, also called thekitchen.[11]Adrop volleyis substantially the same shot, but made before the ball bounces.[12]Adink shotis similar to a drop shot, but a dink is hit even softer and performed when the player is at or near the non-volley line, or, if the ball has bounced, possibly standing in the player's own non-volley zone. A dink shot hit before the ball bounces is called adink volley.[13]

Drop shots, drop volleys, dinks, and dink volleys are particularly effective in the sport of pickleball because a player can never volley the ball, hit the ball before the ball bounces, if they are in contact with their side's non-volley zone, an area that extends 7 feet (2.1 m) feet from the net. If a player does volley the ball while in contact with their non-volley zone, that player incurs a fault, and their opponent wins thepoint. Additionally, balls used in the sport are made of a hard plastic that limits the ball's bounce, when compared to balls in other sports such as atennis ball. When drop shots and dink shots are done correctly, it is difficult for the opponent to attack the ball, forcing the opponent to hit a soft upward shot in return. Drop shots are commonly used by the serving team on the third shot of the game, called thethird shot drop, because it can give the serving team time to approach the net,[14]a strategically important position on the court.[15]

---

[TOPIC: Third shot drop]
Thisglossaryprovides definitions and context for terminology related to, and jargon specific to, the sport ofpickleball. Words or phrases in italics can be found on the list in their respective alphabetic sections.